The Project Gutenberg eBook of Herder's conception of "das Volk", by
Georgiana R. Simpson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this eBook.

Title: Herder's conception of "das Volk"

Author: Georgiana R. Simpson

Release Date: November 27, 2022 \[eBook \#69434\]

Language: English

Produced by: Mary Glenn Krause and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Library of Congress)

\*\*\* START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HERDER'S CONCEPTION OF "DAS
VOLK" \*\*\*

                        The University of Chicago

                          HERDER’S CONCEPTION OF
                                “DAS VOLK”

                              A DISSERTATION
                         SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY
              OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOLS OF ARTS AND LITERATURE
                      IN CANDIDACY FOR THE DEGREE OF
                           DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY

                         DEPARTMENT OF GERMANICS

                                    BY
                           GEORGIANA R. SIMPSON

                     Private Edition, Distributed By
                   THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO LIBRARIES
                            CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
                                   1921

                         Composed and Printed By
                     The University of Chicago Press
                        Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.




                         DEDICATED TO THE MEMORY
                                  OF MY
                            FRIEND AND TEACHER
                         FRÄULEIN AGNES BURCHARD
                                    OF
                             ROSTOCK, GERMANY

NOTE

I wish to express my sincere thanks to all my Professors, but especially
to Professors Starr W. Cutting, Martin Schütze, and Francis A. Wood,
under whom the major portion of my work in the Graduate School has been
pursued.

This particular study, however, is the outcome of interest awakened by
Professor Schütze while I was a member of his seminars.

I owe a special debt of gratitude to him, not only for his guidance in
this endeavor, but for the inspiration and encouragement which has come
to me from the very beginning of my work under him.

                                                      GEORGIANA R. SIMPSON

CONTENTS

    CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

      I. SEMASIOLOGY OF THE WORD, _Volk_—THE IDEA IN OTHER WORDS         1

     II. CONCEPTIONS OF _Volk_ AS SEEN IN HERDER’S USE OF THE TERM       4

    III. CONCEPTIONS OF _Volk_ AS GATHERED FROM HERDER’S COLLECTION OF
           _Volkslieder_                                                15

     IV. CONCEPTIONS OF _Volk_ IN HERDER’S DISCUSSION OF “OSSIAN’S
           PEOPLE” AND THE ANCIENT HEBREWS                              22

      V. FOUNDATIONS OF INDIVIDUALITY AND PERSONALITY IN HERDER         31

     VI. EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY THOUGHT IN HERDER’S CONCEPTION OF
           _Das Volk_                                                   36

    VII. CONCLUSION                                                     54

         BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                   58

CHAPTER I

SEMASIOLOGY OF *VOLK*---THE IDEA IN OTHER WORDS

Before going directly to the main discussion of our theme, a background
is sought in a brief semasiological study of the word *Volk*. The word
is widespread in the Germanic languages; Gothic, however, offers no
examples. Among the earliest recorded Germanic forms are those in Old
English and in Old High German. Old English *folc* meant people, common
people, multitude, a people, tribe, family, army:

"He sloh folces Denigea fyftyne men"---*Beowulf*.

"Folces hyrde"---*Beowulf*.

It was particularly used originally of a crowd of people. Skeat's
*Etymological Dictionary* suggests the possibility of its being related
to both flock and full.

Old High German *folc* meant people, body of warriors, servants, crowd,
mass. The oldest meaning here suggests forces of war: *dhazs himiliscâ
folc*.

The word occurs in Old Frisian as *folk*; in Old Saxon, *folc*; and in
Old Norse, *folk*; with meanings equivalent to those found in Old High
German and Old English.

Kluge's *Etymological Dictionary* says that the meaning "division of an
army" seems to be the fundamental meaning of the family group, from
which Lithuanian *pulkas*, heap mass, Old Slavonic *plŭkŭ*, host of war,
are borrowed forms.

In Middle English the word took on the additional meaning of an
aggregation of people in relation to a superior; e.g., God, a king, or
priest; further it began to mean also the vulgar or lower classes, this
use easily rising out of the meaning "mass" or "the many." Such
expressions occur as *beboden waes Godes folce*, *Folkes Mass Book*.

In Middle High German the meaning was people, hosts of war, army,
servants, subjects, multitude: *er das Volk gewan* (*Gudrun*, 1162, 2).

In Modern English the word is chiefly colloquial, being superseded in
more formal use by "people."

In numerous combinations (following German precedent) it has the sense
of pertaining to, current among, or existing among the masses of the
people or the common people. Such expressions as folk-belief,
folk-custom, folk-literature, folk-name, folk-song, and folk-speech are
prevalent.

Modern High German has retained the word with nearly all of its
primitive meanings: *die schottischen Völker empören sich und drohen
abzuziehen*;\[1\] *Mein Volk zu mindern*;\[2\] *Was rennt das
Volk?*;\[3\] *du weisst, wir alten fahren, und ihr junges Volk
reitet*;\[4\] *den Teufel spürt das Völkchen nie*.\[5\]

The large number of compounds in which the word is used limit its
connotation to either "the masses" or "the common people": *Volksbuch*,
*Volksdichter*, *Volksgeist*, *Volkslehrer*, *Volksschule*, etc. Kluge
in his *Etymological Dictionary* says: "Connection with Latin *vulgus*
is uncertain; for it is questionable whether the Latin word together
with the Germanic family group would come from an original *qelgos*,
*qolgos*."

Weigand, *Deutsches Wörterbuch* says: "The earlier comparison with the
Latin, *volgus*, is not possible. Rather to be compared here are the
word *voll* and roots related to the Greek πλῆθος."

THE IDEA IN OTHER WORDS

The ideas conveyed by the fundamental meanings found in the word *Volk*
appear in other words and in various languages:

GREEK

    πλῆθος—a great number, a throng, a crowd, multitude, especially
    of people.

    πολύς—properly of number, many; opposed to ὀλίγος.

    οἱ πολλοί—the many; that is, the greater number.

    ὄχλος—a moving crowd, a throng, irregular crowd, in a political
    sense, the populace or mob, opposed to δῆμος.

    γένος—race, stock, family, whether by blood or by nationality:
    αἷμα τε καὶ γένος

    ―—a race in regard to number, γένος ἀνδρῶν, mankind.

    φῦλον—a set of men or any living beings as naturally distinct
    from others; a race or tribe; in a closer sense, a race of
    people or a nation.

    ἔθνος—a number of people living together, a company, a body of
    men.

    ἔθνος ἑταίρων—a band of comrades.

    ἔθνος λαῶν—a host of men.

    ὁ δῆμος—a district, country, land. Also the people of such
    a district, hence (as in early times the common people were
    scattered through the country while the chiefs held the city)
    the commons, common people. δήμου ἀνήρ opposed to βασιλεύς.

LATIN

    _Vulgus_—people collectively or without distinction, the
    public or people generally: _Non est consilium in vulgo_. The
    multitude, the common people, the populace.

    _Populus_—a people, the commons in contradistinction to
    the senate and knights: _senatus populusque Romanus_. The
    inhabitants of a country or town, a nation, a whole people:
    _Populus Romanus victor dominusque omnium gentium_. A large
    number of people, a crowd, throng: _populus fratrum_.

    _Plebs_—The common people, commonality, the ignoble opposed to
    _patricii_, _patres_ or _senatus_; whereas _populus_ comprises
    both classes. When the knights, _equites_, were raised to a
    separate class, the _plebs_ formed the third; i.e., the last or
    lowest class; hence, the lower class of people, the populace,
    the mass.

FRENCH

    _Peuple_—a multitude of people of the same country and living
    under the same laws: _Les peuples ne souffrent que par les
    fautes des rois_.[6]

    _Peuple_—a multitude of people who, although not occupying the
    same country, have the same religion or the same origin: _et je
    serai leur Dieu, et eux ils seront mon peuple_.[7]

    _Peuple_—that part of a nation considered as opposed to the
    classes among whom there is either more ease or more education:
    _Il y a le peuple qui est opposé aux grands. C’est la populace
    et la multitude._[8]

In Middle English the word people was already a synonym for *folc*: "A
Blysful lyf, Ledden the peoples in the former age" (Chaucer).

In Modern English the word people has almost entirely displaced *Volk*
except in colloquial or archaic speech. Like *Volk* in its fundamental
sense we have:

    People—a body of persons composing a community, tribe, race, or
    nation.

    People—persons in relation to a superior, or to some one to
    whom they belong.

    People—the common people, the commonality; the mass of the
    community as distinguished from the nobility and ruling, or
    official, classes, etc. “A people’s voice! We are a people yet”
    (Tennyson).

CHAPTER II

CONCEPTIONS OF *VOLK* AS SEEN IN HERDER'S USE OF THE TERM

I

*Volk* is that part of a nation which is the governed class as distinct
from those who are above them in authority and who stand as the ruling
class; i.e., the governed as separate from the governing.

I, 16: "Man weiss dass nach den Staatsplänen Lykurgs und Solons, die als
die Muster der übrigen glänzten, die Stimme des Volks, eine Stimme des
Staats, ja beinahe selbst Gott war." *Volk* here is the collective mass
of individuals constituting the state as opposed to the ruling heads.

I, 16: "Dies konnte das Volk beantworten, nicht aus Staatseinsichten,
sondern weil jeder Bürger streiten musste." Herder is discussing the
power which the people have in the simplest democratic form of
government to declare or to forbid war. *Volk* is here the collection of
citizens which make up the state as opposed to nominal rulers.

I, 188: "Cicero ärgert sich, dass er dem Volk zu gefallen, 'pulcher' und
'triumphus' statt 'pulcer' und 'triumpus' aussprechen müsste." In
similar connotation are such phrases as: "fraget das Volk"; "die niemand
als das Volk geben wird"; "worauf das Volk hinkte, wenn es nicht gehen
konnte"; "bloss weil das Volk sie vor Drüsen ansahe."

I, 18: "Selbst das Volk ist nicht mehr dasselbe. Dort war dieser Name
ehrwürdig: er begriff alle Bürger, Rath und Priester ausgenommen." The
collective mass of citizens who form the state in contradistinction to
the individuals who were nominal rulers.

I, 22: "So sieht man, dass ihre Schutzgötter, und ihre Gottesdienste,
dass Orakelsprüche und Ceremonien blos heiliger Nebel und Opferrauch
waren, die Augen des Volks zu blenden." Herder here mentions Cicero as
augur and writer on religious subjects; *Volk* are the citizens,
exclusive of those occupying the official rank such as that held by
Cicero, for example.

XIV, 34: "So ist ein Unterschied zwischen Cultur der Gelehrten und
Cultur des Volks." Herder speaks here concerning the organization of the
state among ancient peoples. The *Gelehrten* were the teaching and
priestly class---those who were in possession of certain secret
knowledge. The *Volk*, while not having this knowledge, were
nevertheless not without culture. We may take *Volk* to mean nation or
people in the same sense in which a modern people might be considered as
such and include its clergymen and lawyers who had special professional
training.

II

Quotations in which *Volk* is used as synonymous with nation. The ideas
of collective personality and of *Nationalgeist* are prominent here.

I, 23: "Der Charakter unseres Volks ist nicht mehr die dreiste Wildheit
der Alten; sondern eine feinere und mässigere Freiheit; die Freiheit des
Gewissens." Herder discusses the question of freedom in the fatherland
and uses "fatherland" as synonymous with *Volk*; *Volk* is nation.

I, 147: "Ein Volk das ohne Poetische Sprache grosse Dichter ... gehabt
hätte ist ein Unding." *Volk* is nation.

I, 261: "So sehr sich immer Voltaire, und die seines Theils sind,
beklagen, dass wir ein eckles dummes Volk aus einem Winkel der Erde so
sehr erheben." *Wir* here refers to the German people in the eighteenth
century. *Volk*, then, means a nation.

I, 262: "singen wir denn für Juden? die sich für das einzige Volk Gottes
hielten? die von dem feurigsten Nationalstolz belebt wurden?" *Volk*,
here, in the light of *Nationalstolz*, clearly means nation. In the same
connection and with the same meaning he says: "Unser Gott ist ein Vater
der Menschen nicht eines Volks."

I, 276: "Ein Rabbi, der für sein Volk Patriotismus, Känntniss seiner
Gebräuche." *Volk* here refers to the Jews, hence means nation.

II, 8: "Allerdings ist auch die Sprache einer Nation ein beträchtliches
Stück in der Litteratur derselben.... Man kann die Litteratur eines
Volks, ohne seine Sprache nicht übersehen." *Volk* is clearly a synonym
with nation.

I, 13: "ein Vorrath, der freilich oft durch Raub und Beute Nachbarn
bereichert, aber so wie er ist doch eigentlich der Nation zugehört, die
ihn hat ... der Gedankenschatz eines ganzen Volks." In this passage,
language (*Sprache*) is the word *Vorrath*, to which reference is made.
*Volk* is the same as nation.

II, 28: "Der ganzen Nation wäre ein solches Buch ein Schatz: ... denn
der Genius, der über die Wissenschaften eines Volks wachet ist zugleich
der Schutzgott der Sprache desselben." *Volk* is nation.

II, 32: "Und was dörfen wir uns unserer Consonanten schämen, wenn sie
Concente der Tapferkeit sind, um Götter und Stammväter unseres Volks,
Helden und Erretter der Nation zu preisen." *Volk* is nation.

II, 160: "Gemeiniglich waren die grössesten Schriftsteller zugleich die
grössesten Nationalautoren. Den Geist ihrer Zeit, die Denkart ihres
Volks, die Natur ihrer Sprache, wusten sie." *Volk* is nation.

III, 30: "sie werden Thränen und Thaten wecken: ein Schatz des
Vaterlandes, und das Gefühl, das sie besingen und wirken, Gefühl des
Volks, Nationalgeist." *Volk* here is nation.

III, 62: "ihn sollte ein Held anstimmen, der zugleich König war, der
dadurch die Griechen rettete, der ihnen die Opferung versprochen hatte:
dieser also sein Wort brechen, sein Volk nicht lieben, dafür auch nicht
etwas Saures thun wollen?" *Volk* here refers to the ancient Greeks, and
therefore has the meaning of nation.

III, 398: "Wo, unsre Religion noch sinnlichen Vorstellungen Raum gibt;
wo sie sich einer Poetischen Bildersprache bequemt: da ist
sie---Orientalisch. Unter einem Volke gebildet, das ihr Gott auf alle
Art von Bildnissen abwenden wollte, in Gegenden, die das
Uebermenschliche suchten, in Nationen, die Verhüllungen des Körpers, und
Geheimnisse des Geistes lieber verehren als das offne Schöne lieben
wollten---im Geist und in der Sprache dieses Volks die sinnliche
Bildersprache unsrer Religion also geoffenbaret." *Volk* is nation.

III, 414: "Wenn er durch Dichter gebildet war, wenn einem Publikum in
Griechenland Dichterverse und Poetische Bilder ihrer Mythologie im Kopfe
schwebten, ohngefähr auf die Art, als unserm Volke Kirchenlieder,
Bibelsprüche (eine Vergleichung die hier blos Nationalunterschied seyn
soll)." *Volk* is nation.

III, 425: "eine Nation, deren Merkwürdigkeiten eben so verwickelt von
der Politischen Wissenschaft sind, dass eine einzelne Münzensymbole sie
nicht vorstellen kann, ein Volk, das aus der verblümten Bilderzeit
hinaus, Wahrheit suchet, und Wahrheit findet: ein Volk endlich, in dem
die Münzen und der Geschmack auf denselben durchaus für keine Produktion
des Publikum gelten kann---ein solches Volk soll sich seine Geschichte
des Geschmacks und der Kunst aus Münzen weissagen, sich ein Buch durch
mit einem andern, dessen Numismatik Himmelweit von der ihrigen abliegt,
hämisch vergleichen lassen? wer ist Bürger dieses Volks, und sagt nicht:
*unde mihi lapides?*" This passage shows *Volk* to be synonymous with
nation.

There are frequent uses of the word *Volk* in the plural, *Völker*, with
the same connotation:

II, 19: "Die Litteratur fremder Völker und Sprachen ist oft als eine
fremde Colonie unter andere Nationen eingeführt."

II, 23: "Was haben Völker und Sprachen für Vor- und Nachtheile gegen
einander?"

II, 79: "das Namenregister ... das mich aus allen Zungen und Sprachen
und Völkern und Gesellschaften der Erde überführen soll."

III, 32: "eine Ader des Gefühls, die die besten Dichtungen und
Geschichte, nicht blos der Griechen, sondern aller Völker durchströmt."

III, 52: "warum die Griechen in Bildung des Schönen so hoch gekommen, um
allen Völkern der Erde hierinn den Preis abzulaufen?"

IV, 168: "der das Schöne unter allen Völkern und Zeitaltern sucht."

V, 86: "der Erste Kopf der an eine wahre Philosophie der Grammatik ...
denkt, muss gewiss erst die Geschichte derselben durch Völker und
Stuffen hinab überdacht haben."

I, 2: "Gestorbene Sprachen.... Glücklich, dass die Völker denen sie
eigen waren, verlebt sind."

I, 3: "Hier knüpft die Politik des Staats die Sprachen zur allgemeinen
Kette der Völker."

I, 262: "Von allen Völkern der Erde abgesondert, brachte es seinem
Schutzgott Nationalgesänge." (Jews.)

V, 500: "Der Stamm des Baums zu seiner grössern Höhe erwachsen, strebte,
Völker und Nationen unter seinen Schatten zu nehmen, in Zweige."

V, 501: "Wenn alle Völker unter dem Römischen Joche gewissermaasse die
Völker zu seyn aufhörten, die sie waren?"

V, 514: "Norden wars. Und was man auch nun über den Zustand dieser
Völker für Ursprünge und Systeme ersinnen mag."

VI, 115: "Kannte Noah diese ganz? Konnte er allen Völkern die Warnung
Gottes bekannt machen?"

VI, 128: "Ich bleibe bei den Umwandlungen dieser Philosophie bei spätern
benachbarten Völkern, und dünkts mich kein Traum."

"Aber dass sich die Geheimnisse mit Ideen dieser Gattung unter allen
Völkern beschäftigt."

III

*Volk*, a special group, less cultured, unaltered in certain respects by
the influence of civilization. There are marked implications of theories
of universalism and democracy here. The largest part of the people are
the most important and respectable.

In the following two passages we have a degree of characterization of
the rabble:

XVII, 91: "den leider ist es nur Ein Ding, Poebelsinn und Tyrannei, mit
zwei Namen genannt, wie die rechte und linke Seite."

XXV, 323: "Volk heisst nicht der Poebel auf den Gassen, der singt und
dichtet niemals, sondern schreyt und verstümmelt."

These characterizations of *Poebel* suggest not a lack of culture but
culture of a sort that has had a warping effect. If *Volk* is not this
rabble and, yet, not the learned class, it must stand in some respects,
at least, between the two. It is more dignified and respectable than the
rabble; it has certain intellectual aptitudes and moral traits found
among primitive peoples, but which are usually effaced by a high degree
of civilization and culture.

I, 392: "O eine Schrift, die das ist, was eine Erbauungs---eine
Bildungsschrift für den grössten, nutzbarsten und ehrwürdigsten Theil
der Menschen, das Volk sein soll." The author has been regretting that
the weekly journals, religious books, and sermons are not suited to the
common man, and suggests the kind of literature that would meet his
needs. *Volk* is here the largest, most useful, and most respectable
part of mankind. These people are to be edified and cultivated.

VII, 246: "die bei dem grossen ehrwürdigen Haufen Volk erregt werden
müssen, wenn etwas würken soll. Dies Volk noch nicht zu Raisonnement
gebildet, glaubt und handelt." These are too naïve to have reason;
*Volk* are the naïve, simple people.

VI, 294: Herder here calls the Bible "Orakel Gottes für den besten,
grössten Theil der Menschheit, Kinder und Volk."

VI, 309: "über den Euch noch immer Kind und Volk, der edelste Theil der
Menschheit."

VI, 443: "wie die Kindes- und Volkswelt sich das ursprünglich denken
konnte."

In these last three passages the mental capacity of *Volk* is that of a
child, and the thought therefore implies for *Volk* a meager degree of
education and culture.

VI, 104: "Wo sind in allen unsern Ländern Weisheitsschulen für den
ehrwürdigen Theil unsers Publikum, den man das Volk nennet?" Herder says
these are human beings who form the stock of the nation and
distinguishes them from the nobility who would refuse to enlighten the
*Volk* that these might be the better utilized by the nobility and the
better become the subjects of their tyranny. *Volk* is here a class
beneath the nobility, but ideally they are enlightened and made better
by social contact and religious observances.

VI, 301: "Zu dem schrieb er fürs Volk; ich verstehe unter diesem Namen
die Menge derer, die sich nicht durch die Sprachlehre zu Deutschen
gebildet hatten." Herder here refers to Luther and the people for whom
he wrote; these were the less cultured people.

I, 298: "Weil damals noch nicht ein Unterschied zwischen der Sprache der
Weisen und des Volks, zwischen der Denkart der Vornehmen und Geringen
war; was Homer sang war die Sprache der Götter und zugleich eine
veredelte Sprache des Pöbels." Herder is speaking of Homer's language
and times. In the parallel the wise are the aristocratic; the *Volk* are
those of humble rank.

IV

*Volk* meaning a special group characterized by primitivism in various
forms.

II, 25: "wie die Denkart des Volks mit der gelehrten Denkart neben und
in einander laufe?" "Was giebt die Denkart und Sprache des Volks dem
Philosophen, Dichter und Redner für Masse?" "Was hat dies für Vortheile
und Nachtheile für die Weisen und dem Schüler des Volks?" Here Herder
discusses two separate manners of thinking, designating one as being
peculiar to the *Volk* and the other as being that of the *Gelehrten*;
one as belonging to the *Volk*, the other to the *Philosophen*,
*Dichter* and *Redner*. Here is a clear implication that the *Volk* is a
class apart from philosophers, poets, and orators; a class different
from the sages. Not being wise and learned, they must be those upon whom
artificial methods of training and culture have had less effect than
upon the philosophers, poets, and orators. They are therefore more
nearly the natural man.

I, 157: "So wie das Völkerrecht jetzt im Staat zum Gesez ward: so in der
Sprache.... Es entstand ein Adel ein Pöbel und ein Mittelstand unter den
Völkern wie er in der Gesellschaft entstand." Herder here has traced the
development of prose out of poetry. He finds that the language of
passion gave way to that of mediocre wit, and this in turn became the
speech of reason. Here is suggested a parallel between the rights of the
people, which passed into state laws, and the language which passes from
*Poebel* to *Mittelstand* and then to *Adel*. If we make parallel the
*Völkerrecht* in the development of law with the *Mittelstand* in the
social status, then *Volk* is a class between the rabble and the
nobility. If we follow the analogy suggested in the second sentence of
the quotation, we shall make the rabble those who have the language of
passion; the *Volk* those who have the language of mediocre wit; and the
nobility those whose language is that of reason. Herder's *Volk* here
would be a middle class.

*Volk* is used commonly to mean primitive peoples, i.e., people who have
reached only an early stage of civilization. Among those to whom
frequent reference is made as such are: Greenlanders, Laplanders, Early
Scandinavians, Early Germans, Greeks of Homer's time, Ancient Hebrews,
Ancient Celts in Scotland and Ireland, and American Indians. The moral
standards and intellectual equipment found among these are eulogized and
idealized whenever these peoples as groups are compared with civilized
communities.

V, 189: "In mehr als einer Provinz sind mir Volkslieder,
Provinziallieder, Bauerlieder bekannt, die an Lebhaftigkeit und Rhythmus
und Naivetät und Stärke der Sprache vielen derselben gewiss nichts
nachgeben würden." Here *Volk* is put in apposition with that which is
provincial, which has a peasant character. A meaning which is equivalent
to the less cultured. Herder is discussing the whereabouts of
*Volkslieder* which he locates among the *Volk*, and *Volk* are to be
found in the lanes, in the fish markets, and in the country.

V, 185: "Zuerst sollten also wohl für die Seele des Volks die doch nur
fast sinnlicher Verstand und Einbildung ist." ... Herder here considers
the *Volk* as having the kind of soul which would be formed by contact
with the forces of nature, unaltered by the hand of man, and,
especially, little touched by reflection, the reasoning faculty.

II, 349: "Alles was für das Volk redete und schrieb, Redner, und
Geschichtsschreiber, musste populär sprechen; alles was für Gebildetere
schrieb, Dichter, und Philosoph, und Redner, und Briefschreiber war
freyer." This statement clearly opposes *Volk* to those more cultured.
The adjective, "populär," used with reference to that which would befit
them, gives a shading to the meaning of *Volk*, derived from the meaning
of "popular," that which partakes of a quality peculiar to the populace.
*Volk* here are the less cultured.

V

CONNATIONS ARISING FROM USES WITH ADJECTIVES

These imply an emphasis on a group in which crudeness, the natural as
opposed to the cultured and polished, are eulogized.

XIII, 299: "Jedes eingebohrne *sinnliche Volk* hat sich also mit seinen
Begriffen auch in seine Gegend umschränkt."

XIII, 303: "Was ich auszuzeichnen habe sind einige allgemeine
Wahrnehmungen aus diesem Schattenreich *phantasierender Völker*."

Herder gives as an example of the *phantasierender Völker* the people of
Greenland, India, Lappland, Japan, Peru, and Africa at a period of their
existence when they have a mythology. The mythology he calls a
philosophical effort of the human soul, which dreams before it awakens
and gladly remains in its childhood.

XIII, 328: "Auch unter den *wildesten Völkern* unterscheidet sich das
Weib vom Mann."

XIII, 389: "Daher ist auch bei den *rohesten Völkern* die Sprache der
Religion immer die älteste."

XIII, 392: "die göttlichen Gesetze und Regeln der Humanität, die sich
wenn auch nur in Resten bei dem *wildesten Volk* äussern."

XIII, 393: "Von den *rohen Völkern* der Vorwelt."

V, 681: ".... wie die Römische Staatskunst mit den Deutschen Fürsten
spielte; und die Grundverfassung dieser *Barbarischen Völker* in
Freiheit und Einigung zu erschüttern suchte."

XXV, 7: "Rohe Gesänge eines *rohen Volks*! Barbarische Töne und Märchen,
der Grundsuppe einer Nation."

XXV, 7: "Ohne Zweifel war das *Gallische*, *Englische* und noch mehr das
*Nordischere Volk* blos Volk!"

XXV, 8: "Und wenn man sich nun diese Lieder..... in die *lebendige
Rührung des Volks* zurückdenkt."

XXV, 9: "die Denkart der Nation selbst National; das Volk mit ein so
*ansehnlicher Theil des Volks* dessen Namen man also nicht so Schaamroth
oder eckelnd und betroffen ansah und abscheute."

XXV, 11: "die Reste aller *lebendigen Volksdenkart* rollen mit
beschleunigtem letzten Sturze in Abgrund der Vergessenheit hinab. Das
Licht der sogenannten Kultur frisst wie der Krebs um sich."

COMPOUNDS WITH VOLK

Words compounded with *Volk* show all the various meanings distinguished
in the following simple usages.

XXIV, 268: "Wenn Du Deine Ballade einem jungen Bauermädchen aus einem
Thale .... gäbest die ausser den Kirchenliedern .... oder sonst einem
alten schlichten Gesang nie eine Musik gehört dabei jedoch von Natur
eine angenehmere und für den Zweck deines Gedichts *passendere
Volks-Melodie* wählen als irgend einer unserer grössten Virtuosen."

XXIV, 280: "Ein engerer Bund zwischen Gott und dem Stammvater eines
Hirtenvolks wird darauf dieses Volks Losung." This *Hirtenvolk* is the
Hebrews.

XXIV, 305: "dieser grosse *Völkerstamm* sich nicht von Nord nach Süden
hinab sondern von Gallien Nordwärts." This *Völkerstamm* is the Irish
and Scotch.

XXIV, 307: "nur so viel ist gewiss dass die allgemeine Volkssage Ossian
einige Jahrhunderte später leben lässt."

XXIV, 399: "und da sie Gesetzgeber, Volksleiter waren."

I, 86: "Die herumschweifenden Beduinen sind noch solche Rhapsodisten als
Homer war: sie sammeln einen *Volkhaufen* um sich."

I, 157: "so wie das *Völkerrecht* jetzt im Staat zum Gesez ward."

V, 8: "Eigentlich ist diese Sprache der Natur eine *Völkersprache* für
jede Gattung unter sich und so hat auch der Mensch die Seinige."

V, 132: "Eine Morgenländische Urkunde über die Trennung der Sprachen
(die ich hier nur als ein Poetisches Fragment zur Archäologie der
*Völkergeschichte* betrachte)."

V, 218: "Shakespeare .... fand keinen so einfachen *Volks*- und
*Vaterlandscharakter*."

V, 486: "Wie tausendmal mehr thöricht wenn du einem Kinde .... deine
allgemeine *Völkerliebe* voll tolerante Unterjochung .... gönnen
wolltest!"

V, 493: "ob der Phönicier gleich nicht aus Menschenliebe, Nationen
besuchte, es ward eine Art von *Völkerliebe*, *Völkerbekanntschaft*,
*Völkerrecht* sichtbar."

XXV, 5: "Dünkts mich indessen recht, dass wenn auch diese nie ganz
erwünschbare Vaterlandsschätze gefunden würden, sie doch kaum
*Volks-Vaterlands-Lieder* für uns im strengern Verstande wären."

XXV, 6: "nur mit den Augen sehen und mit dem Herzen verstehen .... wie
es allemal *Volksrührung* ist und seyn sollte."

XXV, 10: "Natürlich musste auch die Denkart und ruhige *Volksart* der
Deutschen an dem ewigen Zwistgewitter theilnehmen."

XXV, 313: "ganz *Volksartig*, d.i. leicht, einfach, aus Gegenständen und
in der Sprache der Menge."

XXV, 314: "Der grösste Sänger der Griechen Homerus ist zugleich der
grösste Volksdichter. Sein herrliches Ganze ist .... Sage lebendige
*Volksgeschichte*."

XXV, 316: "und doch ist überall der alte ehrwürdige *Volkssänger* der
einfältige Hirt."

XXV, 323: "Zum Volkssänger gehört nicht, dass er aus dem Pöbel sein
muss, oder für den Pöbel singt."

XXIV, 263: "Heisst also die Romanze, obwohl ihr nachher der Gebrauch
eine engere Bedeutung gegeben eigentlich nichts als Muttersprache der
südlichen Länder Europens und in ihnen *Volksrede*, *Volksgesang*."

XXIV, 265: "die alten Englischen und Schottischen *Volksgesänge*."

XXIV, 267: "Und so wäre mit echten *Volksgesange* abermals nicht etwa
nur ein Hauptzweig alter, edler, rühmlicher und Ruhmweckender Poesie
sondern der Grund aller Poesie die innere *Rechtschaffenheit und
Honnettetät im Herzen des Volks*---ermordet."

XXIV, 411: "Ungebundenheit (License) soll Endzweck der Regierung sein:
*Volkslaune* (*populare humour*) Ursprung der Regierung."

XIII, 39: "Die Abessinier sind ein Arabischer '*Völkerstamm*' (race)."

XIII, 214: "*Völkerschaften* die den Dörfern und Städten nah sind
mildern und mischen auch mehr ihre Sitten und Züge."

XIII, 231: "Kennten wir nun noch die zahlreichen *Völkerschaften* die
über ihren dürren Gegenden .... wohnen."

XIII, 392: "so ist dieser Begriff, als allgemeiner *Volksglaube* auf der
Erde."

XIII, 427: "Priester- und *Volkstradition*."

XIII, 437: "Geschlechtstafel dieser Stämme .... hält sich in den
Schranken ihrer *Völkerkunde* und ihres Erdstrichs."

XIII, 438: ".... widerspricht nicht nur der Zeitrechnung und der
gesammten *Völkergeschichte*."

XV, 124: "Damit ich mich des altdeutschen *Volksausdrucks* bediene."
"Aus dem Latein kam er ins Englische ins Deutsche, wie mehrere Wörter
und noch ist er in der *Volkssprache*." Herder is discussing the word
*Priamel* which he says is perhaps from the Latin praeambulum. *Volk* in
the two compounds must mean the less learned.

V, 493: "nun müsste der Bewohner des Schiffs und der Küste der
expatrirte Seestreicher und *Völkerläufer* dem Bewohner des Zelts und
der Ackerhütte ein ganz anderes Geschöpf dünken."

V, 501: "Völkerrecht."

V, 515: "Ihre Feudaleinrichtung wie untergrub sie das Gewühl
*Volkreicher* üppiger Städte."

The foregoing citations indicate two distinct senses in which Herder
uses the term *Volk*:

*Volk* is equivalent to nation; nation carrying the idea of a group
bound together by blood or language or government, or by all three. As
such, a *Volk* is a collective personality, has a marked individuality,
and is characterized by a national spirit.

2.  (*a*) *Volk* is a race or a nation that never advanced beyond
    primitive grades of culture; that therefore never was subject to
    what he considers the deteriorating and degrading effects of higher
    civilization; (*b*) *Volk* is a group to be found within a civilized
    nation; a group which has retained the primitivism just noted above.
    Primitivism then is characteristic of all *Volk* included in
    section II. This primitivism whether in the entire race or in a
    special portion is always eulogized. These primitive specimens have
    the most pronounced racial individuality because civilization has
    not interfered with the influences of environment.

CHAPTER III

CONCEPTIONS OF *VOLK* AS GATHERED FROM HERDER'S COLLECTION OF
VOLKSLIEDER

That Herder's conception of that group of people which he calls *Volk*
bears relationship to a certain genre of poetry is implied in the fact
that he first coined the word *Volkslied*:

    “_Volkslied_, n. von Herder, August, 1771 geprägt.” F. L. K.
    Weigand, _Deutsches Wörterbuch_, Giessen; Verlag von Alfred
    Töpelmann, 1909.

    “_Volkslied_ zuerst von Herder.” M. Heyne, _Deutsches
    Wörterbuch_, Leipzig; Verlag von S. Hirzel, 1895.

Herder himself has made a collection of specimens of this peculiar type
of song. According to his own statements these poems bear the
distinguishing marks of that sort of people which he has in mind as
being distinctively *Volk*. In his essay, *Ähnlichkeit der mittlern
englischen und deutschen Dichtkunst*, he says:

    Alle unpolizirte Völker singen und handeln; was sie handeln
    singen sie und singen Abhandlung. Ihre Gesänge sind das Archiv
    des Volks der Schatz ihrer Wissenschaft und Religion ihrer
    Theogonie und Kosmogenien der Thaten ihrer Väter und der
    Begebenheiten ihrer Geschichte, Abdruck ihres Herzens, Bild
    ihres häuslichen Lebens in Freude und Leid, beim Brautbett und
    Grabe.

Herder's collections are from national bodies of people. We ought to
find among these groups of songs common factors which would not be found
as such in that body of poetry which Herder excludes as not being *Volk*
songs.

Further, we should be able to reduce these common factors to lowest
terms which would embody some interpretation of Herder's conception of
*Volk*: "Das sind einmal alte Nationalstücke die das Volk singt, und
sang, woraus man also die Denkart des Volks, ihre Sprache der Empfindung
kennen lernet."

VOLK SONGS COLLECTED BY HERDER

DANISH---FOUR PIECES

    Content—themes: love, marriage, fairy tales.

    Form—rhythm and rhyme marked; often irregular.

    Method of appeal—concrete.

GERMAN---SIXTY-TWO PIECES

    Content—themes: love, war, religion, dance, court life, rural
    life, fairy tales, domestic life.

    Form—rhythm and rhyme marked; often irregular.

    Method of appeal—concrete pictures; abstract thinking.

ENGLISH AND SCOTCH---THREE PIECES

    Content—themes: love, war, religion, domestic life, idyllic
    scenes, court life, vengeance, ghost and fairy tales.

    Form—marked rhyme and rhythm; blank verse, irregular rhyme and
    rhythm.

    Method of appeal—concrete pictures; abstract thinking; deep
    reflecting; dramatic presentations.

ESTHONIAN---FIVE PIECES

    Content—themes: love, war, marriage, tyranny.

    Form—marked rhythm and rhyme.

    Method of appeal—somewhat concrete.

FRENCH---THIRTEEN PIECES

    Content—themes: love, idyllic scenes, court life, domestic
    life, phenomena of nature, classic mythology.

    Form—marked rhyme and rhythm.

    Method of appeal—concrete pictures, abstract thinking.

GALLIC (OSSIAN)---SIX PIECES

    Content—themes: love, war, religion, death, personified nature.

    Form—little rhyme, rhythm often marked but irregular.

    Method of appeal—concrete, vivid visual and auditory pictures,
    dramatic presentations.

GREEK---SEVEN PIECES

    Content—themes: friendship, freedom, marriage, love.

    Form—rhyme and rhythm, sometimes irregular.

    Method of appeal—direct and concrete.

GREENLAND---ONE PIECE

    Content—theme: death.

    Form—parallelism.

    Methods of appeal—concrete.

ITALIAN---FIVE PIECES

    Content—theme: hope, care, springtime, love.

    Form—rhythm regular.

    Method of appeal—concrete and abstract.

LAPLAND---TWO PIECES

    Content—theme: love for animals, love.

    Form—rhythm regular.

    Method of appeal—concrete.

LATIN---SIX PIECES

    Content—theme: temptation, marriage, religion.

    Form—rhythm, rhyme, sometimes irregular.

    Method of appeal—concrete, abstract.

LETTIC---FIVE PIECES

    Content—theme: love, marriage, springtime, lordship.

    Form—rhythm and rhyme.

    Method of appeal—concrete.

LITHUANIAN---NINE PIECES

    Content—love, marriage, war, idyllic scenes, fairy tales.

    Form—rhythm, rhyme, often irregular.

    Method of appeal—concrete pictures, abstract thinking.

SKALDIC---TEN PIECES

    Content—themes: mythology, battle.

    Form—rhythm is regular.

    Method of appeal—concrete, rugged.

PERUVIAN---TWO PIECES

    Content—theme: mythological, love.

    Form—rhyme irregular, rhythm.

    Method of appeal—somewhat concrete.

SPANISH---THIRTY-FOUR PIECES

    Content—themes: love, war, religion, court and city life.

    Form—rhyme and rhythm quite regular.

    Method of appeal—moralizing and abstract thinking. Few concrete
    pictures.

This investigation of these poems leads to the following: Each group of
poems embodies an expression of personality, individuality which grows
out of peculiar environment; not merely physical environment, but also
social, political, and religious environment. Each, either in content,
form, or in its method of appeal, sometimes in all three, bears traces
of the milieu out of which it sprung.

The notes of waning glory and ancestral lament of Ossian gain their
character from a different period in the life of the nation from that
recorded in the Moorish battle songs in the Spanish collection.

The ruggedness of the Skaldic poetry bespeaks a roughness in climate and
scenery not to be found in the French poems.

The mythology of the Scotch Highlanders and of the Norsemen, depicted in
their poetry, is different indeed from the Mohammedanism of which the
Spanish pieces speak.

The English and German songs which are characterized by Christian
customs are colored neither by Mohammedanism, Gallic, nor Classic
mythology. The deep reflective moods of the Shakespeare specimens grew
out of a social and intellectual environment entirely the opposite of
that in which the concrete and vivid pictures of many of Percy's
Reliques had their birth.

In all this difference, the common feature is that individuality is
expressed. Individual traits appear within each group. Racial
consciousness distinguishes one group from the other.

Now personality and individuality are corner stones in Herder's system
of thought. His discussion of Lessing's "Laokoon" sets forth the
principle that true art will be characterized by these.\[9\]

Herder's philosophy is also emphatic in showing that all art is shaped
by the environment out of which it grew. The essays "Shakespeare,"
"Homer und Ossian," and "Vom Geist der Ebräischen Poesie" are replete
with such thought.

The art of every nation then will bear national imprint. The national
stamp, this expression of personality and individuality, both products
of various kinds of environment, belongs to Herder's conception of
*Volk* wherever the idea is identical with that of nation or race.

Now the preceding chapter has shown that however often Herder uses the
term as synonymous with nation or race, he has also a distinctive and a
sort of esoteric use.

The evidence that poetry has been shaped by environment and expresses
the individual consciousness of a group of people cannot be taken as
conclusive evidence that the group from which it emanated belongs to
Herder's *Volk* of the specific type, for Herder excludes from the
category of *Volkslieder* that poetry which bears the imprint of
scholastic and pedantic cultural milieu to the extent that certain
primitive traits find no expression.

Another common factor, then, must be sought which is distinctive of
people in this more restricted sense.

The way in which the material is presented is what I have called in my
analysis of the pieces "the method of appeal." There is no common basis
on which we can place the specimens viewing them from this side. Many of
them present vivid visual and auditory pictures. Many others are marked
by abstract thinking or sober reflection. Some are dramatic
presentations, others are simple descriptions. Some are cold moralizing;
others expressions of strong emotions.

All of these selections are in some kind of rhythmic form. It may be
parallelism, rhythmical blank verse, or marked feet and rhyme. But we
cannot make use of this as a very definite factor, since many specimens
are translations which cannot preserve the original exactly. However, we
have in the original the English and Scotch, the Ossian and the German
collections. All of these present a form of rhythm which is usually so
irregular that it would not meet the demands for measured feet, verses,
and rhyme to be found in the highly polished and formal poetry. Now in
his discussion of rhythmic forms in poetry Herder indicates that the
human love for rhythm has its foundations in the physiological processes
and symmetry of the body: *Der Pulsschlag der Natur, dies Athemholen der
Empfindung ist in allen Reden des Affekts ... in der Poesie ... die doch
eigentlich Rede des Affekts seyn soll*.

The people who produced this poetry, then, were close to nature in their
forms of rhythmical speech.

The content of these poems remains to be considered.

Among the Esthonian pieces is a little love song which Herder has heard
the harvesters sing at work. It is idyllic in setting. Thoughts of love
are all-abounding. Happiness amidst rural scenes is common among all
nations.

"König Ludwig" is an Old High German battle song which interweaves
thoughts of God and religion; subjects which never cease to engage the
attention of mankind.

*Wiegenlied einer unglücklichen Mutter*, a Scotch mother's song of
unfaithful love; the poem has a setting in domestic life. *Litthauische
Daina*---song of the departure of a young bride who goes to her new
home; domestic life and custom are the themes. There is sadness at
leaving the home of her girlhood.

These embody expressions of common, human feelings.

A number of the Spanish songs have their scenes laid in the city and at
court; but they sing of love, vengeance, and jealousy---all of which are
intensely human.

*Erlkönigs Tochter*, is a Danish piece which sings of elves. Thoughts of
the supernatural are among all mankind.

*Frühlingslied*, is an Italian piece which rejoices at the coming of the
flowers and birds and the budding of the trees. This season always
awakens human happiness.

*Röschen auf der Heide* presents personified nature. Such
personification is among all men.

*Totenlied* comes from Greenland. All peoples bemoan and eulogize their
dead in song.

*Tanzlied* is German. Nearly every collection has pieces which present
the rhythm and joyous emotions of the dance. This kind of pleasure is
common among all races.

The songs from Ossian tell of departed ancestors and heroes. The
sentiment expressed is universal.

From Shakespeare appears such things as Hamlet's *Probe einer
schauderhaften Metaphysik über Tod und Leben*.

*Macbeths schreckliche Dolchscene*; is there any human breast in which
the sentiments involved in these deep reflections have not sometimes
found a place?

Now it is what Herder himself says in introducing these selections from
Shakespeare which justifies us in making the content, the theme of his
whole collection of *Volk* songs, the common ground upon which they all
meet.

    “In Shakespear gibts von jeder kleinen Nuance der menschlichen
    Denkart und Stimme Proben oder vielmehr lebende Naturartungen:
    und so fange das berühmte Selbstgespräch Hamlets an, was man
    schon Prosaisch in unsrer Sprache hat.”

Herder's collection of *Volk* poetry embraces as themes: love, war,
religion, domestic life, idyllic scenes, vengeance, court life, ghost
tales, fairy tales, marriage, mythology, phenomena of nature, death,
personified nature, freedom, the dance, the seasons, and hero and
ancestral veneration.

These embody sentiments universal among mankind; feelings which are
fundamental in the human breast; thoughts which are innate in humanity.
That which is universal, fundamental, and innate is natural. These songs
find a response among the people from whom they arose because these
people are products of unhampered nature. Both rhythm and content lead
to this conclusion according to Herder's conception. *Volk* as seen from
this angle, then, are either a primitive people or a group within a
people representing advanced stages of civilization, which group has
still retained the methods of thinking, the feelings, the modes of
expression, and the tastes of primitive people.

We get from Herder's collection of *Volkslieder*, then, two conceptions
of *Volk*: (1) *Volk*, a collective personality resulting from the
development of individual consciousness into community individuality and
consciousness; (2) *Volk*, a primitive people or, within a civilized
nation, a section, which has maintained certain natural fundamental and
primitive characteristics.

CHAPTER IV

CONCEPTIONS OF *VOLK* IN HERDER'S DISCUSSION OF "OSSIAN'S PEOPLE" AND OF
THE ANCIENT HEBREWS

Herder has discussed, in connection with two groups of poetry which he
distinctly calls *Volkspoesie*, each race from which the particular
collection arose. Both directly and indirectly he presents in each of
these peoples the peculiar characteristics by which he identifies a
community with his ideal conception of *Volk*.

In his collection of *Volk* songs he has presented literature from many
and varied peoples of the earth, but he has discussed at length, to show
the traits which stamp their *Volkspoesie* as such, only two of these
groups.

An examination of the common factors which the author sees as essential
elements of each of these races ought to give us in one form his
conception of *Das Volk*.

The two races are: (1) Those whom he believes to be the ancient Gauls,
from whom we have the collection known as "The Songs of Ossian"\[10\];
(2) the ancient Hebrews.\[11\]

OSSIAN

Herder places the people among whom this body of literature arose in the
islands known as the "Hebrides," in the highlands of Scotland, and in
Ireland.

Rugged mountains covered with roaring forests or spotted with desert
tracts surround the inhabitants. Mists and clouds, midnight and storm,
abound both on mountain tops and in the intervening valleys. Their huts
are bordered by rocks and narrowly shut in by foggy darkness or from
rough cliffs; they overlook the sea.

At the time at which we see them these highland dwellers look often upon
wilderness full of sacred views, upon battlefields, lonesome graves, and
blotted-out footsteps.

These old Highlanders believed in an all-high Being, whom they conceived
to be self-existing. The cloud was the dwelling place of patriotism and
love. The voice of renown, that is of song sung by friends yet alive to
the honor of their departed ones, still highly esteemed, introduced
these departed to their ancestors. With a sigh and tear as password,
they were received at once into the smiling presence of their
forefathers, who had clear, transparent figures like to the curled
clouds. Their hands were weak, their voices deep and soft. They swayed
themselves over the entire abode of their race and rejoiced in boundless
space. Space they prized above everything else. Fright and horror were
considered as narrow and shut in. Hence they called the grave the narrow
house, and weak courage, the breath of a narrow soul.

The noble dead never became old, but grew constantly wiser because they
conversed with the good of other times. On the other hand, the souls of
the wicked were driven whirling into a thick fog which always hung over
an offensive smelling morass. They never came out of this fog, and never
saw the sun. One did not know the name of the other. The black water of
the morass lake was their only converse; the voice of the Heron and the
quacking of ducks their music.

Ossian's folk attributed every sudden death to an invisible hand which
threw a stone out of the clouds and which they called an "arrow of the
destroying woman."

"Their chief conception of the highest being was that it governs the
clouds and heavenly bodies and rejoices at bravery and fortune of
mankind; that it remained ever invisible ... that the entire earth out
of fear would like to catch and imprison it."

The dead were mourned in funeral dirges sung on the graves of the
departed; in the case of heroes, often amid battle tumult, these songs
were directed to ancestral heroes who awaited the dead in the clouds.

One of their myths which Herder extracts from Ossian shows a certain
phase of their religion:

"As they sing in the moonlight to the moon goddess, Mona, this maiden of
the heavens comes with gentle movement, with silent, beautiful cheek;
her playmates, the stars, stand in rows to receive her; the clouds
bordered with gold trip before them as servants; she outshines all her
rivals so that they blush and conceal themselves in veils. On such an
occasion as this the hero Ossian turns his sad song to the thought, How
would it be if she should once disappear from the heavens, if she should
then go into her little hut to cry and cry as he does? He wonders if she
like him has lost friends, and he begins to comfort the beautiful girl
and to cheer her up so that she quite joyfully smiles again."

The family feeling is strong, and it is the foundation of nearly all
good feeling toward fatherland and friend, tribe and neighbor. There are
common among these people scenes full of innocence, of friendship, of
fatherly, brotherly, in fact family, love in general. Fingal is hero and
leader but also lover, bridegroom, husband, friend, father. Ossian is
warrior, but also son of noble Fingal, and in this very relation the
singer of the praises of his ancestors, of his friends, of his brothers,
of his sons.

It is out of the sadness of separated loved ones that we hear the most
touching tones and the harp is made to resound to praises sung to
ancestors. Although these tribes are said to be wild, they are in many
respects closely bound to customs and forms. The harp is their musical
instrument to whose touching tones their legends are fitted into song.

Herder points out that the stage in the history of Ossian's people from
which this collection of poetry wins its character is the time of the
extinction of the race of heroes of whom Ossian the brave is the chief
and sad singer. He is the last of his courageous tribe; the witness to
the deeds of noted Fingal and his colleagues; the departing voice of a
heroic age to its weaker descendants. His mournful strains are
accompanied by no awakening call for an age yet to come. His race was
not, like Homer's on Ionian shores, a growing people in the dawn of
splendor looking toward a flowering in the future.

The cause of the mournful strain in the life of Ossian's race may have
been subjection by a foreign power or the invasion of monks bringing the
Christian religion. The poems suggest both. Ossian's songs must have had
a powerful effect upon the people out of whose midst they grew. As long
as there were bards this people's strength was irrepressible. But now we
see a patient, subject race trying to revive itself on the renown and
happy existence of departed ancestors.

When Herder brings to our attention the difference between the mournful
tones of Ossian and the arousing strains of Homer, when he reminds us of
the differing stages of history commemorated by each, the points
entirely unlike at which each writer halts and from which he extracts
for his art character, he sets forth a definite theory; namely, that
each writer, speaking as his people would speak, characterizes his
poetry with the individual content and feeling of his race; that each
race has its personality, and each spontaneously expresses this
personality in its song:

    Und Ossian? Es ist ungerecht von einem Baume Früchte zu
    erwarten, die er, seiner Art nach, nicht bringen kann; Ossian
    sei an seinem Orte das was Homer war; nur stand er auf einer
    ganz andern Stelle. In jedem Lande bildet sich der Volksgesang
    nach innnern und äussern Veranlassungen der Nation.

The eye and the ear of these people are wide open to every sight and
sound which their physical environment presents. The ear is strong,
quick, lasting; the eye keen, embracing, receptive. A certain perceptual
power expressed in alertness, boldness, and noble aspect pervaded their
entire being. According to Herder's philosophy, as expressed in
*Erkennen und Empfinden*, the senses present to the mind pictures which
receive the stamp of feeling and which in turn are given back through
some medium of expression.

In Ossian, the material for these pictures is first and foremost Nature;
Nature robed in the peculiar majesty of the north. The sun is a rash
youth, the moon a maiden who has had as sisters other moons in the
heavens. The evening star is a lovely boy who comes out, winks, and goes
away again. All objects are personified, filled with life and movement,
whether it be wind or wave, or even the down of a thistle. As soon as
possible the object itself becomes a voice, and we hear moanings of
sadness and songs of the harp. These figures are often of the mist,
coming out of clouds through which the stars twinkle.

Ossian sings, also, deeds, happenings of history, the bygone fates of
forefathers, and old legends.

In outline all these pictures are delineations, which are snappy,
strong, manly, abrupt, wild, lively. They are not painted in detail, and
their content does not stream forth slowly in regular and measured
intervals. Less harsh and wild are they, however, than the songs of the
so-called "Northmen," because Ossian's soul possesses a charm giving out
lonesomeness, love, and gentleness mingled with courage and strength of
feeling.

The language is crisp, short, true, and exact, and penetrates by its
simplicity. A single word literally seizes a whole thought and the two
break forth together upon a voice tender and sad. When the singer would
exhort his comrades to courage, he painted his pictures through tones
that fell upon the ear.

In general, Ossian makes us see and hear the living world in scenes that
pass quickly, singly, one by one, without arranging themselves in a
regular and formal procession. Rough, strong sublimity is their
character. The colors which burst upon the eye and the tones which storm
the ear come forth without premeditation and polish; the natural outlet
of a people to whom nature has given an eye and heart and mind for wild
beauty, and in whom manners, customs, and language of civilization have
wrought no marring effects. These peoples see and feel, but they do not
think and ponder. Here Herder makes spontaneity a child of unwarped
nature.

THE ANCIENT HEBREWS

Herder applies his studies to the Hebrew people as he finds them in
their earliest habitations. From his analysis of formative forces and of
the peculiar personality resulting from these influences we have what
follows: The physical features of the lands with which the Hebrews were
familiar were varied enough to give them a rather complete natural
history of the earth. They understood the subsiding of water that left
mountains above them and valleys in between these. They saw that waters
coursed through the valleys and made fertile plains. They knew how
springs gush forth from rocks and trees grow on the banks of rivers.
They knew both the sea and the desert. The summer sun brought calm
waters and the cold winds forged fetters of ice. The palm tree and the
cedar, the olive and the grape, grew in these lands. The variety of
animals seems to imply a wide and varied expanse of territory.

The crane, the turtledove, the eagle, the raven, the stork, the ostrich,
the lion, the wild ox, perhaps the elephant and the rhinoceros, as well
as most of our common domestic birds and other animals, frequented these
environments.

Herder conceives of this entire milieu as a world in which the dawn of
human life was arising out of dark night, and giving way to the broad
daylight in which water and air, earth and sea, mountain and forest,
were in the fullest view and most powerful working. The strong contrasts
of oriental skies wrought through light and darkness their sharpest
outlines.

The mild climate was perhaps the most beautiful in the world, and
produced the simplest needs of life with little labor on the part of the
inhabitants. With fertile river valleys in addition, which furnished
grazing lands, it was natural that one of the earliest grades of
civilization should arise here---the shepherd folk.

Although these people had a civilization that was early circumscribed,
it nevertheless presupposes some cultivation. Even the shepherd state
cannot exist without arts and fixed customs. The Hebrews in this
shepherd state had developed family bonds and fixed the ruling power of
the father in domestic life. They had domesticated animals, and
developed tender feelings toward them.

Let us look at the moral and mental traits due to this physical and
social environment.

The eye developed clearness and acuteness, a vivid sensitiveness; it saw
every leaf, every blade of grass, the plains and valleys, the waters in
outline and expanse, the planets and the broad ether in which they hung,
and it distinguished every movement. The ear heard the delicate
rustlings of branches and bows, as well as the roar of winds, the
smallest raindrop, and the rush of mighty waters. Every sense was thus
developed to a finesse which left no phenomenon of nature unobserved.

These sense impressions were impregnated with the feelings and carrying
these effects of feelings they passed onward to the mind and made mental
pictures of a kind which correspond to the character of the imprint made
by the feelings. Then these made-over pictures were given back to the
world in the sublime language found in the Old Testament. It is in these
pictures, in this investing of free nature with the power to feel, that
we see the texture and depth of feeling which are an essential part of
the personality of this group.

They saw the dawn rising out of darkness. They felt that the phenomenon
was due to a cause superior to any power in man. They could not account
for the beginnings of mankind. The consciousness of limitations of their
own knowledge and the awe for the unknown first cause turned the actual
darkness and dawn and full daylight into chaotic emptiness, a ray of
light at the beginning of creation and a completed work at the end of
six days---a wonderful personality directing it all. They saw the trees
and the plants thriving in their own spheres, and they attributed to
them life impulses given them by the sympathy and love and directing
force of special geniuses, the messengers of God. The stars were light;
they had undeceiving brightness and constant courses. They stamped the
sense impression of them with the feeling of worshipful joy, of rhythm
which became music and dancing, and so it was that the stars became the
daughters that shouted about the throne of the Great Ruler. At times
they assigned to them the sense of power for defense in well-ordered
numbers of individuals, and the stars became an army ready to do battle
for God. Again they were his willing servants and messengers. They saw
the heavens stretching from horizon to horizon, and everything in
creation working in its own sphere with regularity and order. Their own
feeling for system, harmonious working in family and tribal circles,
pictured God in paternal relations; a householder who stretched his
great tent by fastening it to the outmost borders of the earth, and
opened and arranged therein the treasures of his household. They heard a
light rustle of leaves and imprinted upon it the feeling of gentleness
and kindness, and it became a messenger of God, an angel. They heard the
thunder and their shuddering gloom translated it into the voice of an
angry God. They listened to their own heartbeats and transferred their
rhythm to their own speech, for we may account for the free light rhythm
in their songs by comparing it with the systole and diastole of the
heart and the movements of the breath in the physiological processes of
inspiration and expiration.

Their national pride and national joy found expression in collective
song which might either glorify God or invoke their own well-being. Such
song is at one and the same time inspiration and expression.

In general, their poetic language draws concise analogy between the
objects of creation and the qualities and attributes of the creator of
these things. It lingers over single images, repeats them, wonders at
them, and finally gives them forth with a vigorous tongue incapable of
empty words.

These souls so entirely formed by the sights and sounds of nature
blended with inner feeling give a secret, mystical significance touched
with the finest spiritual sense to the pictures and parallels which they
produce. We have here a peculiar race type living close to crude nature,
an individuality which is shaped by this primitive milieu and which
expresses itself in sharp and strong outlines in its art. The most
marked feature of this individuality is the spontaneity in its
expression.

The common factors to be drawn from this exposition, which contribute to
the interpretation of Herder's general conception of *Volk* are:

1.  The physical environment of both groups was primeval nature; i.e., a
    material world that had undergone very few of the changes which may
    be wrought by the arts and crafts of what we term higher stages of
    civilization.

    Kurz wir sind mit Denkart, Sprache, Sitten des Jahrhunderts so weit
    aus Ossians Natur heraus, als unsre Städte, Höfe, Palläste,
    Schulgebäude keine Schottische rauhen Gebürge, unsre
    Gesellschaftskreise und Zerstreuungen im Museum kein Tanz unter
    rauschenden Bäumen.\[12\]

    Als Gesetzgeber wirkte Moses auf den Geist seines Volks mit
    Riesenstärke. Dass er sie zum Acker- und Hirtenvolk machte, und so
    viel es seyn konnte, Handel u. Eroberung ausschloss. Land- und
    Hirtenmässig ist ihre Poesie dem grössten Theile nach. Ländlich sind
    ihre Bilder, im Hirten- und Ackerleben der grösste Reichtum ihrer
    Sprache.\[13\]

2.  Both races were subject to powerful control by this physical
    environment:

    Alle Gesänge solcher wilden Völker weben um daseiende Gegenstände,
    Handlungen, Begebenheiten, um eine lebendige Welt.\[14\]

    Und alle hat das Auge gesehen! Die Seele stellt sie sich vor! Das
    setzt Sprünge und Würfe:\[15\]

    Ihre Ideen sind voll starker Contraste, voll Licht und Dunkel, voll
    Ruhe und Arbeit: dies ist der Character des morgenländischen
    Himmels, und des Genius seiner Nationen.\[16\]

    Wenn die Biblischen Dichter von den Schneegüssen des Libanon; vom
    Thau des Hermon; von den Eichen Basans; vom prächtigen Libanon, und
    angenehmen Carmel reden; so geben sie Bilder, die ihnen die Natur
    selbst vorgestellt hat.\[17\]

3.  Among both, their ideas of God and their religion were interwoven
    with personified nature:

    Darthula. Ein Gesang an die Mondgöttin (Mona, Mana, μήνη) vielleicht
    der schönste, der je im Mondschein gesungen worden.\[18\]

    Solche Bilder und Ideen, als uns auch nur die ersten Kapitel Moses
    gewähren. Hier ist als ob Einer der Elohim selbst, der Genius der
    Menschheit unsichtbar lehrte .... und singet den Menschen, seinem
    unsichtbaren Vater und Schöpfer gleich.\[19\]

4.  Both were races of people with keen, strong, exact senses:

    .... der rauhe Schotte Ossian? Er sang lebendig, und stürmte also in
    den kurzen Augenblicken lebendiger Stimme auf Herz und Ohr; für
    matte Augen im Lehnstuhl, .... wollte er nie in der Welt solche
    schöne klassische Augenweide schaffen.\[20\]

    Bilderrede und Gesang also sind die beiden Hauptforten der Poesie
    der Ebräer; .... sie sind Poesie fürs Auge und Ohr, durch welche
    beide sie das Herz besänftigen oder bestürmen.\[21\]

5.  The members of both races had, as innate characteristics, rapid and
    direct interaction between sensation, feeling, imagination, and
    expression:

    Wir sind freilich in der ganzen Denkart unsres Jahrhunderts zu weit
    von Ossian ab. Mehr an eine Kette raffinirter Vorstellungen,
    leichter Abstraktionen angenehmer *Pensées* und Reflexionen gewöhnt,
    fals an den rauhen Schrei der Leidenschaft, kühner Hinwürfe einer
    starkgetrofnen Einbildung, und einer wüsten, starken Gestalt der
    Seele.\[22\]

    Seine Muse ist Tochter der Natur auf ihren wildesten Höhen erzogen,
    aber rasch, kühn, edeln Ansehens, nur mit natürlichem Reitze
    geschmückt und im Tanze der Natur hinfliegend.\[22\]

    Sehen Sie Hiob. Die Erde war ein Pallast.... Der Ocean ward, wie ein
    Kind, gebohren und gewindelt: das Morgenroth handelte, die Blitze
    sprachen.\[23\]

6.  In general, the texture resulting from control of the individual by
    forces of nature unchanged by human interference is in both peoples
    fitly correlated with functioning; i.e., spontaneity is innately and
    intrinsically their nature.

    Homers Rhapsodien und Ossians Lieder waren gleichsam impromptus,
    weil man damals noch von Nichts als impromptus der Rede
    wusste.\[24\]

    Nun ist bei den Ebräern beinahe Alles Verbum: d.i. alles lebt und
    handelt.\[25\] Alles in ihr ruft: ... ich lebe, bewege mich, wirke.
    Mich erschuffen Sinne und Leidenschaften, nicht abstrakte Denken und
    Philosophen.\[26\]

With all these points in common, Ossian's people and the ancient
Hebrews, as portrayed in Herder's analysis of their poetry, differ from
each other as races in religion and in social customs. They show us
different habitats. They depict different historical epochs and scenes.
But that which is common in all this difference is, according to Herder,
that each has a personality of its own which characterizes its art.

    In jedem Lande bildet sich der Volksgesang nach innern und
    äussern Veranlassungen der Nation. Ossians Gedichte bezeichnen
    den Herbst seines Volkes. Die Blätter färben und krümmen sich;
    sie falben und fallen. Der Lufthauch, der sie ablöset, hat
    keine Erguickung des Frühlinges in sich; sein Spiel indessen
    ist traurig ... angenehm mit den sinkenden Blättern.[27]

    Gesetzt, wir konnten alles dies wissen; singen wir denn
    für Juden die sich für das einzige Volk Gottes hielten?...
    Von allen Völkern der Erde abgesondert, brachte es seinem
    Schutzgott Nationalgesänge.[28]

    Es verdient fast nicht bemerkt zu werden ... dass man die
    poetischen Bilder und Empfindungen keines Volks und keiner Zeit
    nach dem Regelmaas eines andern Volks, einer andern Zeit zu
    beurteilen, zu tadeln, zu verwerfen habe.[29]

CHAPTER V

FOUNDATIONS OF INDIVIDUALITY AND PERSONALITY IN HERDER

Herder as philosopher was concerned more with practical and concrete
applications of his principles than with dogmas and abstract theories.
The following brief investigation of purely philosophical discussions is
made with a view of determining how he applies his philosophy to this
definite anthropological conception.

In his *Gespräche über Spinozas System* Herder sets forth much of his
own religious philosophy. A passage in the second dialogue substitutes
for the word "attributes" the word "forces" in expounding one of
Spinoza's postulates. The passage then reads: "The Godhead reveals
itself in an infinite number of forces and in an infinite number of
ways." It is with the word for forces that we are concerned at this
point---*Kraft*, *Kräfte*.

This same word Herder uses in discussing the fundamental life-principle
in the world at large, which is the theme of his first few sections in
the essay entitled: *Vom Erkennen und Empfinden in ihrem menschlichen
Ursprunge und den Gesetzen ihrer Würkung*. These *Kräfte*, these
"modifications of God," find their impulse to operate in a stimulus,
beyond the material form of which Herder cannot go.

Herder's philosophy plants itself from the beginning quite firmly on
material foundations. He says that in the qualities which are constantly
designated by such words as heavy, thrust, fall, movement, rest,
strength, even power of inertia, is implied a life-principle, a soul.
Any close observation of nature must show that the great working power
of nature is everywhere the same, and it is the analogy between the
processes of the material world in general and the phenomena in the
human organism in particular which can give the clearest insight into
the great life-principle. This study by analogous reasoning is not
artificial, Man cannot avoid feeling the similarity between himself and
external nature. Human beings must of necessity, he continues, vitalize
everything about them with their own feelings.

The feelings then are strongly instrumental in man's interpretation of
the world about him.

I. STIMULUS

The first phase of feeling which Herder considers is *Reiz* or stimulus.
The peculiar phenomenon of stimulus says he, which may be seen in the
smallest, most delicate filaments of plants, causing them to contract
and expand, and bespeaking a sort of feeling is due to the same law
which controls the most complicated feelings and passions of the human
being. This all-pervading law of stimulus Herder finds in the action of
physical heat and cold, which he makes parallel in its working with
pleasure and pain respectively. Pain, disturbance by something foreign,
contracts; the strength collects, increases for resistance, and takes
its stand again. Well-being and pleasure---warmth---expands, makes for
calmness, placidity, enjoyment, and release.

That which is expansion and contraction in dead nature, the result of
warmth and cold, seems to be here the obscure seed of stimulus and
feeling in man. The "world-all," the entire feeling, nature of human
beings and animals moves in this ebb and flood of warmth and cold. The
power to expand and contract which is the effect of this heat and cold,
pleasure and pain, Herder makes the fundamental principle of the power
for self-nutriment.

This power is nothing external or mechanical, in which case it would not
be life. The plant structure of organic fibers which takes in life from
the surrounding elements does so through its own activities. The power
to escape its enemies and to make over all its nourishment into
differentiated parts lies within the plant. The complicated body of the
animal likewise has this stimulus to seek the nutrition essential for
life within: hunger and thirst are powerful exciting forces. When he
applies his theories to man, he calls love the most powerful stimulus to
life.

Herder ascribes to the plant something in addition to the stimulus to
seek nutrition when he recognizes that intelligence in plant structures
which selects only such elements as fit the peculiar needs for its
development after its kind. He does not succeed in getting rid entirely
of the external in operating the organism; he sees in breathing a kind
of time-beating by which nature swings the machine, and here nature is
without, for she breathes upon the machine, in this harmonious way, the
spirit of life.

Thus far Herder has recognized the existence of a stimulus in the
vegetable and animal kingdoms, which is in reality a life-principle.
This life-principle is not only the monitor over the feelings, but
merges into them and becomes the stuff of which feelings are made.

What is the relation of these indefinable and unanalyzed stimuli to the
feelings? Since the passions which surround the heart find their roots
in the finest fibers of the physical structure, the degree to which
these fibers are stimulated determines the degree to which the feelings
will be excited and will express themselves. Love, courage, anger, and
bravery are in proportion to the stimulus of the heart and the
collaborating parts: "Die Innigkeit, Tiefe und Ausbreitung mit der wir
Leidenschaften empfangen, verarbeiten und fortpflanzen macht uns zu den
flachen oder tiefen Gefässen die wir sind."

The forcefulness of thought is likewise dependent upon the vigor of this
obscure stimulus, for no thought, says he, can reach the brain unless
feeling in its proper physical connection has preceded it.

And just here our philosopher lays the very roots of individuality. The
degree to which the fibers are stimulated is the beginning of the
operations which will end in producing an aggregate of properties
peculiar to an individual.

II. SENSES

By this inductive method, which develops fundamentally a philosophy of
evolution, Herder finds that the senses are a nerve-structure developed
to meet the waves of stimulus from without and feeling from within and
to differentiate them more finely than did the fibers which worked only
in a general way. But the law is the same. The nerves of every sense
operate according to the same law by which the fibers contract and
expand. The nerves advance to meet pleasant agreeable things, but recede
from and resist unpleasant things.

Now Herder observes that something other than the organ of sense and the
external objects must operate to produce sensation in at least two of
the senses. He sees a certain mental bond without which sight and
hearing could not go to the object nor the object to the senses; this
common substance, he says, is light, a substance which has the
peculiarity of taking just so much from creation as the two end organs
can receive. But this light as a medium is a requisite for the finer
senses only. There are coarser senses, fibers, and stimuli which cannot
be brought into action thus. They can feel only in themselves, for the
object must come to them, touch them, and, to a certain extent, be one
with them.

Herder is explicit in connecting individual character with the senses.
The contribution which each sense makes to the soul cannot with any two
human beings be the same in kind, strength, depth, and breadth. There
are many proofs of this. Seeing and hearing, which furnish most of the
material for thinking, are seldom in one individual with the same degree
of training or of natural force. This will not only account for
inequalities of the senses evinced in all forms of expression in a
single individual, but for such inequalities among groups and races.
For, he continues, imaginative power in which thoughts and feelings
disport themselves is made of the flowing together of sense impressions.

This is Plato's thought also when he objects to making knowledge mere
sense-perception because it would make a different standard of knowledge
for each man. Socrates in *Theaetetus* quotes Protagoras on the same
point: "Sensations are relative and individual." One scarcely needs to
be reminded here of Herder's thorough acquaintance with Greek
philosophy.

The way from a sensation to thought is through the nerve-structure of
sense organs, these nerve-structures furnishing just such a medium
between the object of sensation on the one hand and thinking and willing
on the other, as does light between the object of sense and the visual
and auditory organs.

Never losing sight of the physiological element in his psychology,
Herder tells us that the soul has grown out of the body, and has so
outgrown the body that soul has become the monarch over that, without
which soul could not exist. All its thinking grows out of feeling, and
this feeling out of a body having in its command manifold obscure forces
administered to by variously endowed "servants" and "messengers."

III. KNOWING AND WILLING

Herder denies that anything in the way of knowledge comes back to the
soul out of the platonic fore-world, and abstract egoism, he says, is
opposed to truth and the open course of nature. Just as all of the
soul's knowing depends upon obscure stimuli and forces having their
foundations in the body and leading to sensations and then to reasoning,
so her willing comes from these as a natural sequence of her knowing.
Any knowing without willing would be false and incomplete. If knowing is
only a deep feeling of truth, who is going to see truth and at the same
time be blind to it---know goodness and not will to do it? Every single
passion or feeling thus knowing the good would at the same time will the
good. Herder is emphatic about the interdependence of these two. Just as
no knowing is without willing, no willing is without knowing; they are
only one energy of the soul.

This suggests Socrates in the *Protagoras*, as he argues that men would
always do good if they knew the good. "No man voluntarily pursues evil
or that which he thinks to be evil. To prefer evil to good is not in
human nature."

Briefly summarizing: Herder finds his *stimulus* the same everywhere in
the material world. It is the principle of life since it impels to
self-nutriment and reproduction. It works by the same law in both body
and soul. Variations of it in degree are the foundations for
individuality and personality. All that is true of feeling for
essentially stimulus becomes feeling. Out of all this Herder arrives at
the conclusion: "Der tiefste Grund unseres Daseyns ist individuell,
sowohl in Empfindungen als Gedanken."

The distinctive personal and individual character whose foundations have
just been traced, according to our author, can not come to its fullest
development except as a component part in a larger self-conscious and
self-directing entity which he calls "humanity."

This humanity as a whole, and the relation of the individual to it, is
discussed in the collections *Briefe zur Beförderung der Humanität*. An
emphatic tone regarding personality and individuality as characteristics
of the group pervades these letters.

Existence as a self-conscious being which develops into group
consciousness Herder finds rooted in human frailty.

Primitive man, to himself and enigma, he observes, when comparing his
visible condition, his natural capacities, his will-power with enduring
nature, was forced to a feeling of weakness, to a sense of mortal
existence; he finds himself of the earth, a fragile house of clay.
Sympathy then and the realization of one's duty to one's fellow-men
began here.

But the consciousness of frailty led also to a knowledge of our powers
and abilities, to a sense of our calling and our duties, and brought us
to a deep consideration of human nature.

The group is always striving toward an ideal pattern which is "the
character of the race," and, again, this character is in the individual;
for, says Herder, he who does not make the best of himself cannot assist
the sum total of the race.

The author states the idea when he says that it is according to the
sacred laws of nature that man is a complete unit in himself, and at the
same time an important element of groups each a consistent part of
larger groups which make the sum total of humanity. Man is friend,
citizen, husband, father; fellow-citizen, finally, in the great city of
God on earth.

CHAPTER VI

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY IN HERDER'S CONCEPTION OF *DAS VOLK*

Herder, by numerous references and discussions, in which he is definite
and explicit as to name and theories, shows a thorough acquaintance with
the various schools of philosophy which were influential throughout the
century in which he lived. Among those whose names occur many times in
his works are:

    Roger Bacon
    Francis Bacon
    Baumgarten
    Berkeley
    Boileau
    Bolingbroke
    Condillac
    Descartes
    Diderot
    Hume
    Kant
    Leibniz
    Locke
    Montaigne
    Montesquieu
    Newton
    Rousseau
    Shaftesbury
    Spinoza
    Voltaire
    Wolf

These are philosophers whose expressions of thought left their traces
either vaguely or deeply upon the enlightenment period and, as already
said, whom Herder knew well. But the doctrines of many of these men
converged. Of others, the principles were developed and amplified by
successors. The main ideas of the period which enter into Herder's
conception of *Volk* are found in three great exponents: Leibniz,
Shaftesbury, and Rousseau. The influence of each upon Herder will be
examined here.

LEIBNIZ AND HERDER

IV, 224: Herder calls Leibniz the greatest man that Germany has produced
in later times.

IV, 361: Herder calls Leibniz and Plato the two greatest heads for
hypotheses.

VIII, 178: Herder says that no one says it better than Leibniz, that
bodies as such are only phenomena of substances, as the Milky Way is of
stars and the clouds of drops.

IX, 493: Herder regrets that Leibniz was not sufficiently appreciated by
the Germans; most of them in the city in which he lies did not even know
where his grave was.

IX, 534: Herder cites Leibniz as saying that human wit and humor are
never more effective than in play, and uses this in support of his own
belief that the human heart expresses itself most effectively in the
nature songs of primitive people.

X, 305: Herder sees the flower of Leibniz in Shaftesbury.

XIII, 199: Herder agrees with Leibniz that the soul is a mirror of the
"world-all" and he believes there is a deeper truth in Leibniz'
statement than is usually recognized; i.e., all the forces of a
"world-all" lie hidden in the soul, and they need only an organization
or a succession of organizations to set them into activity.

XIV, 417: Herder finds support in Leibniz for the statement that the
Catholic Church considered the king a protective magistrate under the
supremacy of the Pope.

XV, 180: Herder says Leibniz pointed out weak sides of Locke's
philosophy.

XVI, 450: Herder makes the following statements:

    1. In Leibniz’ mind were associated fruitful conceptions of all
    sciences and of all the realms of nature.

    2. Leibniz said that one must finally, so far as conceptions of
    bodies are concerned, come to simple substances, which he calls
    “Monads.”

    3. I (Herder) am convinced that among the three ingenious
    hypotheses with which he has enriched metaphysics the monad is
    the most fundamental, and will sometime win a place.

    4. Without this indivisible working element, the nature of
    physical bodies cannot be explained.

XVI, 458: Herder calls Leibniz a "Proteus of Science," who has done much
to unify philosophical truths.

XVI, 606: Herder calls Leibniz, "our immortal Leibniz."

XVII, 331 ff.: Herder eulogizes Leibniz, emphasizing his theories of
play, his mildness and sympathy in criticizing others his youthful,
impartial soul.

XVIII, 126: Herder says that Leibniz was the most modest among all the
reformers of philosophical thought; he thought that all systems of the
ancients could be united because each held something good.

XXI, 19: Herder quotes Leibniz as saying that language is the mirror of
human understanding.

XXI, 70 ff.: Herder translates Leibniz' *Ueber Philosophie in der
Deutschen Sprache*.

XXI, 145: Herder mentions Leibniz' principles of *Identity and
Causality*.

XXI, 319: Herder translates Leibniz' *Vom philosophischen Vortrag*.

XXII, 190: Herder translates Leibniz' *Ueber Macht und Anwendung der
Musik*.

XXIII, 132: Herder recommends Leibniz' *Neue Versuche über den
menschlichen Verstand* to young men.

XXIII, 479: Herder says, Leibniz, had he lived to see his original plans
revived in the Scientific Society in Berlin, probably would have
arranged a *System der Völker nach Sprachen und Bildungen*. This method
of studying history by going to natural environments and to the sources
is sufficiently in accord with Herder's ideas to call forth the prophecy
that what the past century had omitted in this respect the future would
do.

XXIII, 483: Herder, referring to Leibniz' system of *Monaden,
prästabilirten Harmonie u. f.*, says that no one doubts that there is
much that is true and beautiful in it; no one dares deny a world of
souls and a harmony between mind and body; there is no doubt that there
are pure conceptions in which thoughts are considered only as workings
or developments of the soul, and, on the other hand, the laws of the
world of bodies are considered as mechanical and artificial.

XXIV, 267: Herder notes Leibniz' romantic attitude, observing that
Leibniz regretted the decline in the feeling of courage and honor and
that he counseled a return to the deeds and voices and models of the
past to reawaken these.

XXV, 88: Herder says if Leibniz found human wit and humor most real and
effective in play, certainly he (Herder) is justified, in finding the
most faithful reproductions of traditions, language, and customs at the
point where truth and delight meet; i.e., in song.

XXX, 135: Herder calls Leibniz the greatest man that Germany has had.

XXX, 258: Herder has remarked frequently upon Leibniz' theory that the
human mind is never more clear-sighted and disposed to activity than in
play. He analyzes the thought here, and it is worth considering because
it hinges closely upon Herder's philosophy which causes him to seek
genuine *Volk* character in methods of expression which are natural
rather than artificial.

He asks, Why is it that there is this connection between our innermost
selves and pleasure and joy? Many forms of play are so difficult and
fatiguing, others are subject to such strict rules; just because they
demand this is the form of play interesting for those who like it. It
becomes pleasant because it keeps both soul and body constantly and
interchangeably busied. In the progress of being occupied lies an
indefinable pleasure; we feel the happy progressiveness by which our
forces are strengthened and grow. The more frequently this interchange
takes place, the more do we realize our forces enriched.

XXIII, 154: Herder says Shaftesbury sent to Leibniz the former's works
and that Leibniz found in them his own system.

XXIII, 461: Herder praises Leibniz' efforts in behalf of the Royal
Scientific Society in Berlin.

XXIII, 468 ff.: Herder has written an essay on Leibniz in which he
reviews the work of the latter under the following heads: *Gottfried
Wilhelm Leibniz*: (1) *Theologie und Religion*; (2) *Rechtsgelehrsamkeit
und Politik*; (3) *Geschichte, Alterthümer, Sprachen*; (4) *Mathematik
und Physik*; and (5) *Die erste Philosophie*.

Herder's own comments in certain parts of this series of expositions are
important in this connection.

1.  *Theology and religion.*---Leibniz' proof of Christianity Herder
    finds was based upon natural religion; after firmly laying the
    foundation of this natural religion, one should show the necessity
    of a revealed religion, then the superior beauty of the Christian
    religion, surpassing as it does all other religions. Leibniz sees
    atheism as well as materialism, to say nothing of the disparagement
    or mockery of Christendom, as the herald of a barbarism with which
    is bound up the decay of honor and morality. Herder's comment upon
    this is: How faithfully have succeeding times proved this to be
    true! Leibniz, he continues, would rejoice if he could see the Bible
    so clarified, every one of its books interpreted in the light and
    spirit of its own time and above all the subtleties foreign to the
    sense and content of Christianity removed---all this, such as it was
    in his own day, is Herder's idea. Important to note here is the
    return to nature as a foundation for Christianity, and to natural
    environment for the interpretation of Christian teachings.

2.  *Jurisprudence and statesmanship.*---Here Herder finds that Leibniz
    became a real teacher *der Völker* through his work, *Codex des
    allgemeinen Völkerrechts*. Just as Leibniz in his opposition to
    Puffendorf founds man's natural rights upon eternal principles of
    right and reason, so he carries these on into the so-called
    "voluntary rights of peoples" to which he adds in the Christian
    Republic a divine, positive right.

This divine, positive right Herder admits was, in the beginnings of the
Christian republic, conceived of as being embodied in the emperor as
head of the state. But, says he, Leibniz' great thought was true; true
in the sense that this divine, positive right is that which made itself
evident long before the French Revolution.

He asks, Does Christendom teach anything other than pure humanity? It
must be founded upon humanity which is also Leibniz' *Codex des
Völkerrechts*.

It is clear, continues the commentator, that what a nation demands or
wishes from another it must also offer; force, faithlessness, and bold
arrogance of one toward the other enrage all nations. This *Codex des
Völkerrechts* is written in the breasts of all human beings. Wherever
his view was unobstructed, he saw clearly the political relationships of
Europe, and prophesied much that followed.

The natural rights of mankind to be applied to humanity through states
and nations, then, is what Herder notes at this point in Leibniz.

3.  *History, antiquities, languages.*---Herder notes here that Leibniz
    liked above everything else in History the origins of races,
    *Uranfänge der Völker*, which led to their antiquities and language
    stocks. This accounts for his diligence in comparison and derivation
    of languages and in etymologies. Herder reminds us that a family
    tree of languages has been established since Leibniz' time through
    the Russian journeys in Northern Asia, continuous news from China,
    the investigations of the English in India, and other studies made
    in Tibet, Persia, Arabia, Egypt, Africa, America, and the Southern
    world.

XXXII, 226: Herder's discussion of Leibniz' monad:

    A monad is said to be able to change its representations
    (_Vorstellungen_) and it must change them in accordance with
    its fundamental force; now if these representations are nothing
    but external rapports, must there not lie in the fundamental
    force also the foundation of perceptibility of the external and
    the foundation of the constantly changing perceptibility?... If
    therefore, the soul is a living mirror of the universe then it
    must not reflect this universe from within itself outward....
    But there must be an internal cause in every soul which
    accounts for the part of the universe which the soul looks upon
    and which cannot be sought in a third being, the cause of both.

    Everywhere there is life; everywhere life is connected with
    organs, and where would the cause of the connection lie? Not
    in the life; not in the organ. Where then? A _Deus ex machina_
    must be called which contains the cause of the connection of
    both so that neither of these (life, organ) contain anything
    of this cause, and that is contradiction. One monad is said
    to rule over the others and over many others without there
    being in any one the cause of change which is in the other. A
    monad is said to heighten its forces just so much as its body
    heightens its own organization.

    Now still this interconnected increase is to contain nothing
    in the one for the other; not _causa efficiens_, not _conditio
    sine qua non_, only simultaneousness. How unbelieveable! If the
    adjustment of the organs extends to the making of a certain
    relief or difference, then such a relief or difference in
    the perceptions and all the connecting comes about without
    internal cause, only one cause to explain so many effects which
    are scarcely covered by it. It seems to me the world would be
    incomparably simpler and more manifold if in every monad were
    the cause for its connection and all of its changes.

It seems evident that Herder accepts much of Leibniz' theory of the
monad. The important point of departure is expressed in the two
sentences:

    1. But there must be _an internal cause in every soul_ which
    accounts for the part of the universe which that soul looks
    over and which cannot be sought in a third being, the cause of
    both.

    2. The world would be simpler and more manifold if _in every
    monad were the cause for its connection and all its changes_.
    It is at this point of departure that we see Herder’s emphasis
    on innate potentialities, which are fundamentally different,
    taking shape. Here are individuality and spontaneity in
    incipiency.

REFERENCES TO LEIBNIZ

         I: 116, 142, 166, 233, 415.
        II: 50, 96, 300.
        IV: 15, 224, 248, 361.
         V: 57, 316, 318, 410, 412, 459, 461, 504, 512, 532.
      VIII: 112, 170, 178, 226, 247, 266, 272, 319.
        IX: 493, 500, 534.
         X: 305, 346.
        XI: 90.
      XIII: 199, 364.
       XIV: 417.
        XV: Note to page 33; 35, 71, 180, 320.
       XVI: 450, 458, 504, 292, 606.
      XVII: 158, 210, 265, 267, 274, 326, 331, 334, 336, 338.
     XVIII: 126, 323.
        XX: 358.
       XXI: 17, 19, 49, 70, 71, 145, 185, 319.
      XXII: 67, 190.
     XXIII: 67, 88, 132, 154, 461, 468, 472.
      XXIV: 9, 92, 267, 315.
       XXV: 88.
    XXVIII: 232, 353.
      XXIX: 581.
       XXX: 64, 135, 403, 258, 407.
     XXXII: 32, 221, 225.

SHAFTESBURY AND HERDER

I, 182: Herder says Shaftesbury knows how to use the dialogue
excellently; he had learned it from Plato and taught Diderot.

V, 490: Herder calls Shaftesbury the amiable Plato of Europe.

X, 232: Herder mentions Shaftesbury's *philosophischen Lobgesang auf die
Natur in seinen "Moralists"*.

X, 305: Herder concedes to Shaftesbury a refined, beautiful,
philosophical intellect. He is impressed with the "Characteristics" and
the "Moralists." The latter, says he, can be put side by side with the
writings of the Ancients. Herder finds in Shaftesbury the flower of
Leibniz' philosophy and the teachings of new platonism. He sees traces
of Shaftesbury in Mendelsohn's *Letters concerning Feeling*.

Herder's tone defends Shaftesbury in the statement that one should love
virtue for her own sake, on the ground that many religious enthusiasts,
including Fénélon, have maintained the same thing. Nor is he either
atheist or pantheist in his *Song of Praise to Nature*. He further
mentions the following works in German translations: *The Moralists;
Investigations Concerning Virtue*, Berlin, 1745; *Shaftesbury's
Philosophical Works*, translated by Voss, Leipzig, 1776.

XI, 123: Herder finds Shaftesbury's *Ten Letters to a Student of
Theology* excellent in the following points: (1) What he says of real
philosophy, of empty speculation, of academic *polyhistorie*, of
intellectual ambition and the real freedom of thought, of the writings
of the Greek, and of the beautiful and pure toward which one must aim in
studies of all kinds; (2) what he says of the spirit of endurance and
Christian simplicity.

XI, 220: Herder admires *die Grazien des Platonish-Shaftesbury*
dialogue.

XVI, 407: Herder expresses himself by quoting in translation a stanza
from Shaftesbury's *Moralists*.

XVI, 158, 159: Article on Shaftesbury; holds him in high esteem, calls
him *Virtuoso der Humanität*. Herder declares that Shaftesbury has
influenced the best minds of the eighteenth century.

XXIII, 143 ff.: Herder shows an intimate acquaintance with the life and
works of Shaftesbury as well as the sources of his philosophy. He
reminds that Shaftesbury influenced both Diderot and Leibniz. Herder
reveals his own inclination to take nature and the feelings as
standards: (1) By criticizing Shaftesbury for overlooking an important
principle in Greek philosophy in one of his discussions; namely, the
principle *der Natur zu folgen*. (2) By saying an honorable feeling for
truth and justice is a law of our nature.

XXX, 321: Herder calls Shaftesbury the high priest of the temple of
*Grazie*.

Shaftesbury's *Characteristics of Men, Manners, Opinions, and Time* will
be used as a reference book.

SHAFTESBURY AND HERDER

The elevation of human nature, as found in the individual, to something
which has a universal value, to something higher and nobler than the
interests of self alone was one of the prominent tenets of Shaftesbury's
philosophy. This implied a moral and social system composed of parts
nicely adjusted in each single entity, which in turn was a component
part of a larger whole; the parts of this greater system were likewise
in constant proportion to one another, and so finely and fitly adjusted
that any disarrangement could not fail to effect the harmonious blending
and the unity of the entire design. Out of this, it follows that man can
come to his truest and most natural development in community life only.

    And thus, if there be found in any creature a more than
    ordinary self-concernment or regard to private good, which
    is inconsistent with the interest of the species or public,
    this must in every respect be esteemed an ill and vicious
    affection. And this is what we commonly call selfishness, and
    disapprove so much, in whatever creature we happen to discover
    it.—_Inquiry_, Book I.

    When we reflect on any ordinary frame or constitution either of
    art or nature, and consider how hard it is to give the least
    account of a particular part without a competent knowledge of
    the whole, we need not wonder to find ourselves at a loss in
    many things relating to the constitution and frame of nature
    herself.—_Inquiry_, Book I.

    To love the public, to study universal good, and to promote the
    interest of the whole world, as far as lies within our power,
    is surely the height of goodness, and makes that temper which
    we call divine.—_Letter Concerning Enthusiasm_, section 4.

The harmonious man is to be the product of a natural unfolding of innate
human nature. The potentialities within are to be allowed to develop
unwarped and unimpeded and to express themselves completely and
symmetrically. There must be no subordination of personality or
individuality to artificial standards, for nature is the sovereign. If
no powers, inclinations, or impulses are thwarted in their trend and
activity, they will, in all their manifold variety, flower into the
perfectly beautiful and therefore the perfectly good.

    Now the variety of nature is such as to distinguish everything
    she forms by a peculiar, original character, which, if strictly
    observed, will make the subject appear unlike to anything
    extant in the world besides.

    For all beauty is truth. True features make the beauty of a
    face, and true proportions the beauty of architecture—_Essay on
    the Freedom of Wit and Humor_, Part IV.

That faculty by which the good and the beautiful are to be recognized
and approved is indeed little different if different at all from an
emotion. The principle of feeling really becomes the criterion of right
and wrong. It is the principle of feeling which forms the essence of
Shaftesbury's *Moral Sense*. He admits that this sense may be improved
by cultivation, but its essential part is innate. "Sense of right and
wrong" is as natural to us as natural affection itself, and a first
principle in our constitution.

The two ideas which we are considering here as a part of Shaftesbury's
philosophy are the development of the individual and his harmonious
relation to the whole of mankind.

These ideas are made the nucleus of a collection of writings and reviews
by Herder which he calls *Briefe zu Beförderung der Humanität*. These
have been considered to some extent in a preceding chapter as a part of
Herder's system of thought, but the purpose here is to connect the same
with that of Shaftesbury.---*Dritte Sammlung*, Brief 27 ff.

At the outset in this letter the author is concerned with the
distinction between the following:

    1. Menschheit: Menschen sind wir allesamt ... wir gehören zur
    Menschheit.

    2. Mensch, Menschlichkeit: Leider hat man in unserer Sprache
    dem Wort Mensch, und noch mehr dem barmherzigen Wort
    Menschlichkeit so oft eine Nebenbedeutung von Niedrigkeit,
    Schwäche und falschem Mitleid angehängt.

    3. Menschenrechte: Kann ohne Menschenpflichten nicht genannt
    werden.

    4. Menschenwürde: Das Menschengeschlecht ... hat seinem
    grössesten Theil nach keine Würde.... Es soll aber zum
    Charakter seines Geschlechtes, mithin auch zu dessen Werth und
    Würde gebildet werden.

    5. Menschenliebe: Das schöne Wort Menschenliebe is so trivial
    worden, dass man meistens die Menschen liebt um keinen unter
    den Menschen wirksam zu lieben.

He concludes that the word *Humanität* will best suit, because among
both ancients and moderns it connotes worthy ideas. The reference to the
ancients reminds us of the common source from which both Herder and
Shaftesbury drew inspiration. Both were schooled in the literature of
the ancients.

As Herder lingers on the philological discussion, he gives us the
philosophical reason why the conception of frailty attaches to the idea
expressed in the word for man, *Mensch*.

The word "humanity," he says, not only connotes the thought which he
desires to express, but it suits his purpose also on account of its
history. Among the upper classes of the Romans were some who were wont
to temper the execution of justice with mercy when exercising power over
their subjects; such a Roman citizen, Patrician, was *humanus*,
*humanissimus*. Now, he thinks, that since with the Romans the word
connoted the idea of mildness in the exercises of citizenship and law,
that it would be well to take over the word and the idea. He makes
reference also to the Greeks whose word, ἂνθρωπος, looking upward, he
clothes in Plato's words: "As he looks he reasons." Therefore, says
Herder, he does not fail to notice the human failings that lead to
sympathy, consequently to humanity. The knowledge of our powers and
inborn potentialities, of our calling and our duty arises from an
intense study of mankind. He repeats that the Greeks and Romans led the
way in this *studium humanitatis*. The only limit which Herder sets to
what we shall be is to be found in the highest possible formation and
completion of whatever belongs to the character of our race.

Many of the telling thoughts in these letters are scattered in isolated
paragraphs running something like the following: Truth is the bond of
humanity between friends. The purer the thoughts of men are, the more
they agree. The true invisible church is one in all times, in all lands.

Franklin had a wonderful sense of humanity. He proceeds from the simple
eternal laws of nature, from the most infallible practical rules---the
needs and interests of mankind. Franklin recognized the value of the
common people and thought to teach them by clothing his ideas in
simplicity.

Companionship is the foundation of humanity and the communion of human
souls, a mutual interchange of acquired ideas (thoughts) and of traits
of understanding which increases the mass of human knowledge and skill
infinitely. If humanity is no empty name, suffering mankind must rejoice
at the advance in medical science. Human society founded on virtue must
stand. The highest and most fruitful wisdom arises from the (common)
people because they have felt need and suffering, they have been driven
here and there, they have tasted the sweet fruit of trouble and they
know how to care for others.

The kinship to the spirit and philosophy pervading Shaftesbury is here
quite evident.

REFERENCES TO SHAFTESBURY

        I: 182, 303, 305, 307, 524.
       IV: 367.
        V: 284, 316, 388, 390, 396, 490.
      VII: 113, 236.
     VIII: 218, 311, 461.
       IX: 306.
        X: Note to page 232; 305.
       XI: 123, 205; note to page 220.
       XV: 199
      XVI: 26, 403, 407.
     XVII: 154, 249, 274, 326.
       XX: 308.
     XXII: Note to page 210; note to page 334.
    XXIII: 132_d_, 132, 136, 144, 151; note to page 155; 396.
     XXIV: 219.
    XXVII: 397.
      XXX: 17, 32, 407.
    XXXII: 33, 199.

ROUSSEAU AND HERDER

IV, 369: In discussing his ideal book for the development of humanity,
Herder finds that important points would be rules and exhortations for
the development of body and soul; in this he says: *ist Rousseau ein
grosser Lehrer*.

IV, 371: He will imitate Rousseau zealously; will read him, contemplate
him, nationalize him.

V, 37: Herder agrees with Rousseau in that language is not the result of
convention and agreement.

VI, 250: Reference is made to Rousseau's *Pygmalion*.

VII, 65: Herder in his discussion concerning the fall of man quotes
Rousseau with reference to the tree of knowledge and the fall of man.

VII, 74: Herder calls Rousseau one of the greatest lights of his times.

X, 298: Herder says Rousseau's *Confessions* and other writings contain
excellent passages for philosophy and natural theology. Many of these
writings have suffered evil repute (*übel berüchtigt*.)

XV, 248: Herder calls Rousseau a great, wonderful man.

XVI, 26: Herder calls Rousseau a teacher of wisdom and morals.

XVII, 190: Herder speaks of Rousseau as a good man who exaggerates and
who in his phantasy is an idealist for the good.

XVII, 326: Herder says in his own day (*bis in unsern Tagen*) Rousseau's
*Social Contract* has had an effect that its author had scarcely
expected.

XVIII, 359 and 371: Herder says that in his own time (*in unserer
Zeit*), Rousseau's *Confessions* have aroused a great sensation. He
quotes from them.

XVIII, 372: *Sein Geist war stolz, seine Grundsätze waren edel*, p. 374,
he speaks of Rousseau as a tree having brought forth beautiful fruit and
blossoms.

XXII, 151: Herder approves Rousseau's views in the introduction to
*Nouvelle Héloise*, views on poetic language as a natural human art.

XXII, 161: He calls Rousseau one with great ability to express the
thoughts of his heart, and Herder considers this ability peculiar to
*Naturmenschen*.

XXIII, 272: Herder says much that Rousseau has said in *Emile* against
the use of *La Fontaine's Fables* for youth is right.

XXV, 601: Herder translates from Rousseau's *Consolations*.

XXV, 631: Herder has a translation of Rousseau's "Shepherd Song,"
*Consolations*, p. 97, No. 53.

XXV, 632: Translation of "Song of Desdemona," *Consolations*, p. 125,
No. 65.

XXIX, 256: Herder eulogizes Rousseau in the poem *Der Mensch*.

XXIX, 265: Herder calls upon Rousseau to help him know himself.

XXX, 30: In regretting the fact that the taste and desire for
overrefinement was causing wholesome simplicity to be displaced in
educational methods and life in general, Herder calls attention to
Rousseau and interprets him thus:

    Rousseau ruft also ein philosophisches Wehe über unser
    Geschlecht, das die Tugend, Menschlichkeit und Wahrheit
    vom Altar gestürzt hat, und statt dessen eine lächerlich
    verkleidete Puppe des Wohlstandes anbetet. Dieser falsche
    Anstand hat die Schöpfung verdorben; denn was sind seine
    Vasallen?

XXXII, 41: Herder calls Rousseau "our patriotic friend of mankind."

XXXII, 147: Herder says only Rousseau could dig to the knowledge of the
human heart.

"DER MENSCH"

Line 45 ff.: Herder shows that he is influenced by the
eighteenth-century demand for a return to nature in general and by
Rousseau's philosophy in particular in a portion of this poem:

1.  He prizes the universal and fundamental instincts and longings of
    man which show him to be a simple product of nature:

    Den Menschen der Natur den keiner je gesehen und jeder in sich fühlt
    und jeder wünscht zu sehen ... den sing' ich.

2.  The primitivism of this nature-man is eulogized:

                       den Menschen ohne Kunst

    voll Seele ohne Witz, gut ohne Göttergunst, voll Menschheit ohne
    Scham, voll Wahrheit ohne Lügen ohn' alle Tugend fromm und glücklich
    ohn' Vergnügen--- Den sing' ich.

    Sohn der Natur o Mensch---blühst du in Edens Flur? halb Pflanze und
    halb Thier.

3.  The feelings are set up as a standard:

    blos durch Empfindung wahr, schön durch die Wahrheit nur. Nicht
    weniger nicht mehr als Mensch! so ist dein Leben dir zum Gefühl, zur
    Ruh, zur Wirksamkeit gegeben.

4.  Physical environment is to have free sway in shaping this ideal man:

                     wie zeigt sich deine Spur?

    im Schnee der Eskimaux wo edelfrei die Wilden Empfindung und Gesezz
    nach Jagd und Eis sich bilden.

5.  Rousseau is eulogized:

    gebar dich Rousseaus Geist? sahn dich verblichne Zeiten? ... O
    Rousseau! den die Welt im Vorurtheil verkandt, das wahre grosse Maas
    des Menschen in der Hand wägst du was edel sey wenns gleich das Volk
    verdammet

The eulogy continues by praising Rousseau's condemnation of wealth and
pomp and false glory and, finally:

    Du Prediger in der Wüste, fühlst dass du edel bist wenn niemand
      dich auch grüsste.

ROUSSEAU AND HERDER

*Discourses.*---In his *Discourse concerning the Arts and Sciences*
Rousseau insists that our outward lives should be true expressions of
our inner feelings. This harmony between expression and feeling began
its decline under the influences of overrefinement and of tastes that
had been distorted by excessive civilization. Therefore, he argues, it
is the common man, the crude rustic, rather than the polished and
elegant courtier who reveals his heart in all purity; we may deal with
this common man without suspicions, fears, reserves, and treacheries. It
was the simplicity of ancient times when men lived in a primitive state
that bred innocence and virtue, courage and genuine humanity. In this
discourse there is in general a pointed attack upon literary and
scientific training and polish.

The discourse which deals with the inequality of man is based in general
upon the same doctrine which furnishes the ground for the attack on the
sciences and the arts. It attempts to show us what men would have been
had they remained in their original state. This original state was one
in which man lived much like the dumb animals; forests and rocks,
running brooks and springs, furnished abode by day and bed and shelter
for the night, and among these were to be found the meat and drink which
produced strong healthy bodies; bodies robust because their nourishment
was simple. This was a primitive state which had remained true to nature
by not advancing at all or at least not more than a single degree beyond
the original. In such a state man by reason of both his physical
hardiness and his native animal instincts and alertness has all his
faculties, these operating with a force and fineness unknown to the
highly civilized man. Here, as in the essay on the social contract, the
philosopher is opposed to a superior ruling power and arbitrary
establishment of laws.

*Social contract.*---In the *Social Contract* in which Rousseau's social
state is presented as the superior form of government, men had been
brought to realize their dependence upon one another and to know that
co-operation was the true basis of welfare. The doctrine of
individuality which made of man a self-centered unit was weak in that it
offered little protection for the individual. For this individual, born
with natural freedom, was in danger of exercising this freedom to the
detriment of the rights of others.

In giving up himself and his rights to the group, the individual became
subject to no one person, but gained certain rights over each member of
the community. In this compact there is a union of individuals, each
working for the good of the body politic, each a sovereign with civil
liberty and moral freedom.

Thus the restrictions which would be imposed upon members of society by
one supreme authority were avoided. By this means the general will
worked for the general good of humanity.

But the idea of progress implied not only the teaching that the good of
one must be the good of all, but meant also: (1) That man was not
self-sufficient and therefore could come to fullest development only in
the group. (2) That the seeds of individuality lay within man as a
universal element and were nurtured and brought to flower by the
peculiar touch of him who was expressed in their flowering. The
fundamental tendencies in mankind being allowed to unfold, the man will
be good; this goodness is the essential thing in his manhood, and it is
natural.

*Emile.*---The keynote of Rousseau's doctrine here is that of absolute
reliance upon nature without impeding or diverting her progress at any
point. He is in accord with the epistemological side of Locke's
philosophy, and therefore demands that Emile shall have his senses well
developed. He is to have a strong vigorous body, full of courage and
hardihood. Moral education is to be the result of natural discipline
carried on in a sort of laissez-faire way. In general, Emile gets his
education by being thrown into contact with nature and being allowed to
observe and feel the phenomena of a crude environment, and by expressing
directly what he has learned at first hand from this teacher. Emile,
then, is shaped by primitive forces just as the simple, common man in
the *Social Contract* and the *Inequality*. These made the simple,
common man the epitome of that which was of greatest worth to humanity.

*Origin of language.*---In fixing the beginnings of speech, Rousseau
says we can believe that necessities dictated the first movements, and
that passions called forth the first voices. The genius of oriental
languages, the most ancient known to us, have nothing in them that is
methodical or reasoned out; they are vivacious and figurative. It is
evident that the origin of languages is not at all due to the primary
needs of man. The origin is due to the moral needs, to the passions. It
is neither hunger nor thirst, but love, hate, pity, or anger which have
called forth from men the first voices. Fruits do not steal away from
our hands at all; one may nourish one's self with them without talking;
we may follow in silence the prey of which we wish to make a repast; but
to move a young heart, to repel an unjust aggressor, nature dictates
accents, cries, and tones of resentment. It was for this reason that the
oldest words were invented.

The following quotations affirm in a general way the preceding
statements of Rousseau's philosophy:

    L’astronomie est née de la superstition, de la haine,
    de la flatterie, du mensonge;
    la géométrie, de l’avarice;
    la physique, d’une vaine curiosité;
    toute et la morale même de l’orgueil humain.
    Les sciences et les arts doivent donc leur naissance à nos vices.

Discours sur les Sciences et les Arts, Part. II:

    O vertu! science sublime des âmes simples, faut-il donc tant
    de peines et d’appareil pour te connaître? Tes principes ne
    sont-ils pas graves dans tous les coeurs? et ne suffit-il pas
    pour apprendre tes lois de rentrer en soi-même et d’écouter la
    voix de sa conscience dans le silence des passions?

Discours sur l'origine et les fondements de l'inégalité parmi les
hommes:

    Il suit de cet exposé que l’inégalité, étant presque nulle
    dans l’état de nature tire sa force et son accroissement du
    developpement de nos facultés et des progrès de l’esprit
    humain, et devient enfin stable et légitime par l’établissement
    de la propriété et des lois.

    Il suit encore que l’inégalité morale autorisée par le seul
    droit positif, est contraire au droit naturel toutes les fois
    qu’elle ne concourt pas en même proportion avec l’inégalité
    physique; distinction qui détermine suffisamment ce qu’on doit
    penser à cet égard de la sorte d’inégalité qui règne parmi tous
    les peuples policés, puis-qu’il est manifestement contre la loi
    de nature.

The primitivism which stands out in Rousseau's two discourses is to be
seen in a general way in Herder's dislike for the higher culture that
would discourage spontaneous outbursts of human feelings as they appear
in the so-called cruder forms of literature; a culture that would
displace these by a smoother product born of reflection and regulated by
set rules and formulas.

He has an admiration for the instinct which to him is always to be found
in women, children, and fools, and which he sees as the foundation of a
naïveté more valuable as a part of mental equipment than anything which
could be substituted by processes of training and culture.

Rousseau's attempt to return to nature for concrete everyday life finds
its approval with Herder, but the general idea takes a new turn. He
finds in it the inspiration for scientific methods of studying art,
history, and philosophy. His line of investigation in these will be by
way of nature; i.e., man in his primitive abode; man in the hands of
nature; man as the product of his environment.

The opposition to a central and superior governing power, which is found
in the *Social Contract*, to be opposed to the natural method of
community life, finds its echo in Herder in frequent tirades against the
*policirte Nationen*. It is the *unpolicirte Nationen* to whom nature
has given a certain solace that can scarcely be found in *Menschliche
Künsteleien*.

The *Briefe zur Beförderung der Humanität* carry a constant strain,
which makes the interdependence between the individual and the group a
requisite for well-being. This theory, we have seen, finds a distinct
place in Shaftesbury's philosophy before Rousseau had voiced it as his
own.

Emile's senses have been highly developed by his contact with nature,
and it is this sharpness and exactness of the senses that Herder extols
so much in primitive peoples. They are both cause and effect of the work
which nature achieves by her most trusted handmaiden; namely,
environment.

In discussing the origin of language, even though Herder at certain
points takes issue with Rousseau, it is very clear that he is influenced
by the latter and is in agreement with him to considerable extent.

Rousseau has pursued the question of the origin of language, not only in
his essay bearing this title, but also in the *Discourse on Inequality*.

The first sentences of Herder's essay *Abhandlung über den Ursprung der
Sprache* run not unlike a passage in Rousseau's *Discours* just
mentioned:

    Schon als Thier, hat der Mensch Sprache. Alle heftigen, und die
    heftigsten unter den heftigen, die schmerzhaften Empfindungen
    seines Körpers, alle starken Leidenschaften seiner Seele
    äussern sich unmittelbar in Geschrei, in Töne, in wilde,
    unartikulirte Laute.

    Le premier langage de l’homme, le langage le plus universel, le
    plus énergique et le seul dont il eut besoin avant qu’il fallût
    persuader des hommes assemblés est le cri de la nature. Comme
    ce cri n’était arraché que par une sorte d’instinct dans les
    occasions pressantes, pour implorer du secours dans les grands
    dangers ou du soulagement dans les maux violents, il n’était
    pas d’un grand usage dans le cours ordinaire de la vie, où
    règnent des sentiments plus modérés.

Further, in his own essay, Herder says, that as our tones of nature are
for the purpose of expressing passion, it is natural that they should
become also the elements of all that which is emotional, and if we call
this immediate sound of feeling speech, then, says he, it is easy to
find the origin of speech natural.

But although all animals have a speech by which they sound forth their
feelings, such speech will never become human language until reason,
understanding (*Verstand*), arises to use these tones with direct
intention.

In so far, then, as the very beginnings of language are cries of
passion, Herder is in accord with Rousseau in both essays in which the
latter discusses the question.

REFERENCES TO ROUSSEAU, JEAN JACQUES

        I: 22, 47, 96, 484.
       II: 229, 269, 276, 313.
      III: 279.
       IV: 52, 145, 369, 371.
        V: 20, 21, 33, 37, 44, 58, 85, 114, 117, 120, 147, 168, 314, 394,
             452, 583, 640, 643.
       IV: 163; note to page 250.
      VII: 65, 74.
     VIII: 328.
       IX: 354, 474.
        X: 298, 306, 307, 352.
      XII: Note to page 198.
     XIII: 265.
       XV: 35, 248, 495.
      XVI: 26.
     XVII: 8, 97, 190, 309, 326.
    XVIII: 91, 359, 371.
       XX: 288, 293.
     XXII: 151, 161.
    XXIII: 231, 272.
      XXV: Note to page 601; 631, 632.
     XXIX: 256, 265.
      XXX: 30.
    XXXII: 17, 33, 41, 75, 147, 185, 233.

CONCLUSION

The character and frequency of the references which Herder makes in his
writings to the philosophers of the eighteenth century show that he knew
the predominant lines of thought which characterized the entire period
of the enlightenment. The outstanding eighteenth-century theories which
seem to have a place in Herder's conception of *das Volk* are well
epitomized in the teachings of Leibniz, Shaftesbury, and Rousseau.

Herder's own exposition of a part of Leibniz' contribution to thought
shows how he found here some things which were in agreement with his own
fundamental ideas concerning innate potentialities.

The praise given to Shaftesbury's principal ideas of the harmonious
development of the individual and of humanity lead us to believe that
Shaftesbury had exercised an influence on the German writer.

The numerous eulogistic outbursts over Rousseau, the coinciding in many
writings by both men of details concerning the essential elements in
man's nature, concerning primitivism, liberty, and the ideal state, show
that Herder was fully imbued with the spirit of Rousseau, expressed in
the cry, "back to nature."

CHAPTER VII

CONCLUSION

Both the word *Volk* and the various ideas for which it stands are old
and are to be found among many peoples. The parent tongue, the
Indo-European, seems to have had a form which meant "full," "many." The
"many" easily became the "common," so that the "many" as opposed to the
"few" was parallel with the "common," "vulgar" as opposed to the "upper
classes," the "aristocracy." This meaning seems to have been a
fundamental one in both ancient and modern times.

The shift in meaning of the Germanic word *Volk*, which extends the
sense to that of "nation," has been more general and more permanent in
German than in English. It is with these two main conceptions, that is
*Volk*, the common people, and *Volk*, nation, that we are concerned in
this study of Herder. Many examples of Herder's use of the term *Volk*
show that he makes the word an exact synonym for nation. In many other
examples it is used as an equivalent term for nation. In both of these
uses "nation" with Herder means those bound together only by the same
laws and customs whether related by consanguinity or not.

But Herder frequently makes *Volk* stand more specifically for those who
are of the same blood, and in that sense identifies it with "race." We
have seen that these are common uses of the term *Volk* and the idea
conveyed by it, uses which occur in many languages and among many
civilized peoples.

Now Herder, while using the term *Volk* in the commonly accepted sense
of nation, has always firmly in mind certain attributes and powers which
characterize groups as such. They have power to rule; they have power to
express themselves in peculiar ways; they have *Nationalgeist*. This
*Nationalgeist* in the final analysis is the outgrowth of physical and
social environment and conforms to the dictates of these in all its
peculiarities.

In exercising their powers and general spirit, they act as an entity
according to Herder's conception. He makes the group a single being, an
individual. In Herder's day when ideas of nationalism had no definite
shape, this added sense of the meaning of nation meant clearly that he
was a forerunner in the realm of philosophy, and gave to Herder's
conception of *Volk*, even in this commonly used sense, a unique place.
Individuality, personality, distinguished nations just as these traits
mark out human beings.

Herder makes use of the term *Volk* in a second sense. Here he means a
group within a civilized nation which forms the mass below the
aristocracy and the governing class. This use likewise is to be found in
all languages of civilized peoples.

But Herder is emphatic in noting that this group has not been affected
by expurgating and eliminating influences to the fullest extent to which
these have operated. It has therefore been more thoroughly the product
of natural environment. In the proportion to which innate tendencies
have not been checked and warped, individual traits have had free
development. Therefore spontaneous personality characterizes this group
to a higher degree than it does the more cultured. Here Herder makes
prominent his philosophy that unhampered nature is the most potent force
in the development of this spontaneous personality.

In his collection of *Volkslieder*, Herder does not confine himself to
those which are marked by primitivism, but includes also many selections
of polished literary form. But these all submit to a classification
which takes into account the true expression of universal and
fundamental feelings common to all humanity. Here Herder's mind is fixed
on that power which the group has to express itself, to express that
which is fundamental and therefore to show forth its personality.

Ossian's people and the Ancient Hebrews are products of an environment
which is most effective in shaping Herder's ideal *Volk*: namely, nature
unaltered by the hand of man. As a result of such rough, crude
surroundings, these peoples have developed into simple, harmonious
beings, and possess all the elements which Herder considers essential in
man's nature. He finds they are natural because they are primitive, and
they possess superior traits because they are natural. They have the
power to give expression to their personality and have exercised this
power in a marked way in their unique literatures. The individuality of
each group is sharply defined in the songs of each.

Now how does Herder arrive at the requirements to which he makes his
*Volk* conform?

His philosophy as expressed in *Erkennen und Empfindung* recognizes
inborn forces in the individual which are potentialities differing in
kind and degree of working power in each person. These varying
potentialities he makes the constituencies of the senses which are
accordingly different in scope and capacity in every human being.

It must be noted that Herder does not regard these original "forces" as
constituted by the senses; they are prior to and more fundamental than
the senses. The phenomenon *Reiz*, stimulus, which causes the smallest
fiber either in plant or animal to contract or expand, repeats itself in
the nerves of each one of the senses. But this *Reiz* is in the
beginning, and without it there would be no *Kräfte*, no nerve, no sense
organ. This *Reiz*, then, is identical with the innate forces, *Kräfte*.

They control and direct the development of the senses and are,
therefore, the very beginning of that variation in sense functioning
which initiates individuality.

It is in the treatment of these original *Kräfte* that Herder gives his
own turn to Leibniz' theory of the monad.

The principle of the monad was highly abstract, and when Herder took it
over he gave to it a more concrete application. It became the principle
of innate and varying potentialities. The monad was not controlled and
directed by a force outside itself, according to Herder, but by a power
within, and as the power within was never exactly alike in any two
beings, no two could develop just alike. Here are Herder's foundations
for individuality and personality.

A perfection resulting from the unfolding of the content of the
individual life and the shaping of its originality are seen in
Shaftesbury's thought when he makes morality consist of the rich and
full expression of individual powers in a beautiful and sovereign
personality. The individual system as seen in one man in all its
physical and mental elements is related to something external to
himself. Altruistic inclinations are an important part of the natural
endowment of every human being.

Now Herder sees that this unfettered development of natural endowments
will come to its fullest only in relations to others. It is the essence
of his *Humanität*. He goes further than Shaftesbury in that he finds in
this tie, which unites the individual to the group, that which is
universal and fundamental. He endows his *Volk* with sentiments which
are universal and fundamental. It is this universal and fundamental
which makes such expressions as "Hamlet's soliloquy" find a place among
the songs of Herder's *Volk*.

We have seen that when Herder lays emphasis on the feelings, when he is
opposed to arbitrary and restrictive government, when he elevates the
crude and primitive, his system of thought is in agreement with that of
Rousseau. But Herder makes an advance in seeking standards in processes
actually or believed to be found in Nature. His line of investigation in
history, art, and philosophy will be by way of the natural man, i.e.,
the primitive. His *Volk*, then, because of their power to express their
personality freely, give him a theory of art; art must be an expression
of personality.

Both Shaftesbury and Rousseau relate the development of the individual
to the group but neither makes the altruism or interdependence such an
impelling force as does Herder. His *Volk*, conscious of their own
frailty, will have sympathy and a general regard for the needs and
interests of mankind. This consciousness will be not merely a passive
altruism nor an interdependence of material and economic necessity, but
it will be heightened by an ideal love for humanity, which will force to
active and positive efforts to make humanity the highest possible.

When we eliminate details, when we regard only those elements upon which
Herder's thought seems to be continuous, those qualifications of which
he never seems to loose sight, whether he idealizes his *Volk* through
his philosophy, his song collections, his study of the works of other
philosophers, or through the analysis of concrete examples, we come to
the following as essentials in Herder's *Volk*: *Das Volk* is a group
whose innate, natural tendencies have been allowed to unfold and develop
unhindered and unwarped by civilization. They are people who have come
into contact with various forces of nature in the physical world and
have been strongly influenced by their natural environment.

They, as an entity, possess: (1) Individuality, personality; (2) a sense
of that which is universal and fundamental among mankind; (3) common
feelings of relationship to humanity; (4) strong religious sentiments.

They are wont to express themselves freely, fully, truthfully, in
various forms of art, the individual specimens of which find their test
of genuineness in the response which they receive from the group out of
which they arose.

In this ideal conception Herder sees the best that mankind can produce.

FOOTNOTES

\[1\] Schiller, *Jungfrau von Orleans*, I, p. 3.

\[2\] *Piccolomini*, II, p. 7.

\[3\] *Kampf mit dem Drachen.*

\[4\] Wildenbruch.

\[5\] Goethe, *Faust*, I.

\[6\] Fénélon, *Télémaque*, XXIV.

\[7\] Bible, *Jérémie*, XXXI, 33.

\[8\] *La Bruyère*, IX.

\[9\] Dr. Martin Schütze has analyzed this feature of Herder's
philosophy, "Fundamental Ideas in Herder's Thought," *Modern
Philosophy*, XVIII; June, October, 1920.

\[10\] References to these discussions: Herder's *Sämmtliche Werke*,
Suphan, volume and page: I, 437; II, 119, 132, 168, 182, 203, 259, 322,
324, 331, 387, 416; VI, 21; VIII, 99, 216, 391; IX, 317, 543; XI, 297;
XII, 334; XIV, 103, 263; XVI, 323; XVIII, 446; XXIII, 569; XXIV, 232,
301, 302; XXVII, 180.

\[11\] References to these discussions: Herder's *Sämmtliche Werke*,
Suphan, volume and page: I, 258; VI, 1; XI, 215; XII, 1.

\[12\] Ossian, V, 325.

\[13\] Ancient Hebrews, XI, 173.

\[14\] Ossians Gedichte, *Lieder* .... V, 196.

\[15\] Ossians Gedichte, V, 197.

\[16\] Ancient Hebrews, XII, 28.

\[17\] Ancient Hebrews, I, 258.

\[18\] Ossian, V, 326.

\[19\] Ancient Hebrews, XII, 27.

\[20\] Ossian, V, 324.

\[21\] Ancient Hebrews, XII, 22.

\[22\] Ossian, V, 324.

\[23\] Ancient Hebrews, XI, 292.

\[24\] Ossian, V, 182.

\[25\] Ancient Hebrews, XI, 227.

\[26\] Ancient Hebrews, XI, 228. (*die Ebräische Sprache*).

\[27\] Ossian, XVIII, 457.

\[28\] Ancient Hebrews, I, 262.

\[29\] Ancient Hebrews, XII, 8.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

ANDRESS, JAMES MACE. *Johann Gottfried Herder as an Educator.* New York:
G. E. Stechert, 1916.

BACHARACH, ARMAND. *Shaftesbury's Optimismus und sein Verhältnis zum
Leibnischen.* Inaugural dissertation.

BEARDSLEE, J. W. *The Use of ΦΥΣΙΣ in Fifth-Century Greek Literature.*
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1918.

BÜRKNER, RICHARD. *Herder, sein Leben und Wirken.* Berlin: E. Hofmann &
Co., 1904.

DEWEY, MALCOLM HOWARD. *Herder's Relation to the Aesthetic Theory of His
Time.* Chicago, 1920.

DÜNTZER UND HERDER. *Herder's Reise nach Italien. Herders Briefwechsel
mit seiner Gattin.* Giessen: J. Ricker'sche Buchhandlung, 1859.

FRIEDRICH NIKOLAE. *Der Begriff und das Wort Natur.*

GENTHE, EDUARD THEODOR. *Der Kulturbegriff bei Herder.* Jena
Universitätsbuchdruckerei: von G. Neuenhalen, 1902.

HÄNSSEL, O. *Der Einfluss Rousseaus auf die philosophisch-pädagog.
Anschauungen Herders.* Dresden: Bleyl, 1902.

HATCH, IRVIN CLIFTON. *Der Einfluss Shaftesburys auf Herder.* Berlin: A.
Duncker, 1901.

HAYM, R. *Herder nach seinem Leben und seinen Werken.* Berlin:
Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, 1880.

HERDER, EMIL GOTTFRIED VON. *J. G. von Herders Lebensbild.* Verlag von
Theodor Bläsing. Erlangen, 1846.

HERDER, JOHANN GOTTFRIED. *Sämmtliche Werke herausgegeben von Bernhard
Suphan.* Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, 1877.

HÖFFDING, HARALD. *Rousseau und seine Philosophie.* Stuttgart: Fr.
Frommanns Verlag, 1897.

HIBBEN, J. G. *The Philosophy of the Enlightenment.* New York:
Scribners, 1910.

HOPPE, GEORG, i.e., ADAM FRANZ GEORG. *Die Pädagogik Herders dargestellt
auf dem Grunde seiner religiös-metaphysischen und ethischen
Anschauungen.* Leipzig: G. Kreysing, 1908.

HUDSON, WILLIAM HENRY. *Rousseau and Naturalism in Life and Thought.*
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1903.

JACOBY, GÜNTHER. *Herder als Faust.* Leipzig: Meiner, 1911.

KARSTEN, G. E. *Herder and the Volkslied.* The Bulletin of the
Washington University Association. St. Louis: 1905, No. 3, pp. 101-123.

KELLER, LUDWIG. *J. G. Herder.* Jena, 1910.

KRÖHNERT, OTTO. *Herder als Politiker und Deutscher Patriot.* Gumbinnen,
1905.

KRONENBERG, MORITZ. *Herders Philosophie nach ihrem Entwickelungsgang
und ihrer historischen Stellung.* Heidelberg: C. Winter, 1889.

KÜHNEMANN, EUGEN. *Herders Leben.* München, 1895.

KÜHNEMANN, EUGEN. *Herder.* München, 1912.

KÜHNEMANN, DR. EUGEN. *Herders Persönlichkeit in seiner Weltanschauung.*
Berlin: Ferd. Dümmlers Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1893.

LEIBNIZ, GOTTFRIED WILHELM. *The Monadology and Other Philosophical
Writings.* Translated by Robert Latta. Oxford: at the Clarendon Press,
1898.

MORELLY. *Code de la Nature; ou, Le veritable esprit de ses loix*, 1755.
Paris: P. Geuthner, 1910.

MORLEY, JOHN. *Rousseau.* London: Macmillan & Co., and New York, 1891.

RAND, BENJAMIN. *The Life, Unpublished Letters, and Philosophical
Regimen of Anthony, Earl of Shaftesbury.* London: Swan Sonnenschein &
Co. New York: The Macmillan Co., 1900.

ROUSSEAU, JEAN JACQUES. *Oeuvres Complètes de J. J. Rousseau.* Paris:
Chez P. Dupont, Libraire-Editeur, 1824.

ROUSSEAU, J. J. *Oeuvres Complètes.* A Paris: Chez Furne,
Libraire-Editeur. 1835.

SCHÜTZE, MARTIN. "Fundamental Ideas in Herder's Thought." *Modern
Philology.* Vol. XVIII, June, October, University of Chicago Press,
1920.

SHAFTESBURY, ANTHONY EARL OF. *Characteristicks of Men, Manners,
Opinions, Times.* Birmingham: Printed by John Baskerville, 1773.

SIEGEL, KARL. *Herder als Philosoph.* Stuttgart und Berlin: J. G.
Cotta'sche Buchhandlung, 1907.

SIVERS, JEGOR V. *Humanität und Nationalität zum Andenken Herder's.*
Berlin: B. Behrs Buchhandlung, 1869.

SPINOZA, BENEDICT DE. *The Chief Works.* Translated from the Latin, with
an introduction by R. H. M. Elmes. London: George Bell & Sons, 1887.

THANN, ELSASS. Thanner Druckerei und Zeitungsverlag, 1919.

WINDELBAND, DR. W. *A History of Philosophy.* Translated by James H.
Tufts. New York: The Macmillan Co. London: Macmillan & Co., 1919.

\*\*\* END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HERDER'S CONCEPTION OF "DAS
VOLK" \*\*\*

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so
the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this
license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and
trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be
used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the
trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project
Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use
this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be
modified and printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING in
the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially
commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU
DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used
on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree
to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that
you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without
complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C
below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and
you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent
you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with
others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United
States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a
notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright
holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United
States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or
providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with
the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission
for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set
forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access
to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that:

-   You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
    you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
    to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
    agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
    within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
    legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
    payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
    Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation."

-   You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
    License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
    copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
    all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
    works.

-   You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

-   You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your
equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect
in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written
explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received
the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your
written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the
defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S.
federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date
contact information can be found at the Foundation's website and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of
equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations (\$1 to
\$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status
with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility:
www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
