The Project Gutenberg eBook of David Thompson--the explorer, by Charles
Norris Cochrane

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this eBook.

Title: David Thompson--the explorer

Author: Charles Norris Cochrane

Release Date: November 26, 2022 \[eBook \#69432\]

Language: English

Produced by: Al Haines

\*\*\* START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVID THOMPSON--THE EXPLORER
\*\*\*

\[Illustration: THIS MAP WILL HELP YOU TO UNDERSTAND (left half)\]

\[Illustration: DAVID THOMPSON'S JOURNEYS (right half)\]

CANADIAN MEN OF ACTION--NUMBER II.

The Series edited by W. Stewart Wallace, Librarian of the University of
Toronto.

DAVID THOMPSON

DAVID THOMPSON

THE EXPLORER

BY

CHARLES NORRIS COCHRANE

Associate Professor of Ancient History, University College, Toronto

TORONTO THE MACMILLAN COMPANY OF CANADA LIMITED 1924

Copyright, Canada, 1924

BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY OF CANADA LIMITED

Printed in Canada

PREFATORY NOTE

I wish to acknowledge the great debt which I owe to Mr. J. B. Tyrrell
for the use of material contained in his edition of Thompson's
*Narrative*.

It was Mr. Tyrrell who first rescued the name of Thompson from the
undeserved oblivion into which it had sunk. Those who are familiar with
his introduction and notes, will recognize how largely I have borrowed
from them in preparing this short life.

C. N. C.

June 1924.

CONTENTS

I APPRENTICED TO THE COMPANY 1770-1786

II HE FINDS HIS MÉTIER 1786-1791

III TRADER, SURVEYOR, EXPLORER 1791-1797

IV WITH THE NORTH-WESTERS 1797-1798

V EIGHT YEARS OF TRADING 1798-1806

VI ACROSS THE GREAT DIVIDE 1806-1810

VII THE RACE TO THE SEA 1810-1812

VIII LAST YEARS 1812-1857

DAVID THOMPSON

CHAPTER I

APPRENTICED TO THE COMPANY

On the 30th of December, 1783, the Governors of the Grey Coat School at
Westminster, England, received from the secretary of the Hudson's Bay
Company a request for four boys, trained in navigation, to be
apprenticed to the Company for service at their posts in America. At
that time, there were in the school but two boys so qualified--Samuel
John McPherson and David Thompson. The one was so terrified by the
prospect of perils and hardships unknown, that within a week he ran away
from the school and was heard of no more. The other accepted the destiny
for which he had been marked out, and became one of the greatest land
surveyors that the British race has ever produced.

When David Thompson was called before the Headmaster to be informed of
his fate, he was in his fourteenth year, and had been for nearly seven
years a pupil in the school. No description exists of the poor charity
boy as he then was; but from accounts given of him in later life, it is
possible to imagine his appearance. Though he was short of stature, his
sturdy frame already gave promise of the strength that was to enable him
to drive his canoe through the currents and eddies of the western
waterways, or trudge at the head of his men across the plains in the
teeth of a December blizzard. His complexion was ruddy, though his
smooth cheeks were not as yet tanned and furrowed by a life of exposure
to the sun and wind of the great North West. The straight, black hair
which hung down over his forehead combined with a stub nose to give him
an odd look. Yet there must have been already evident, in his
expression, the animation and kindliness which in after years
distinguished him, and suggested at once the boldness and fire of Curran
the Irish orator, and the strength and piety of the puritan Bunyan, both
of whom he is said to have greatly resembled.

Thompson's parents were Welsh, and had borne the name of ApThomas until
they had come to live in London. It was there in the parish of St. John
the Evangelist, that David was born on the last day of April, in the
year 1770. While yet a mere child, he was left an orphan by the death of
his father. So poor was the family that the dead man had to be buried at
the expense of the parish, and the widow, with David and a still younger
infant, was left alone to face the hardships of life in the metropolis.
The boy, however, must have shown unusual promise; because, while still
quite young, he attracted the attention of a certain Abram Acworth.
Through the recommendation of this otherwise unknown benefactor, he was
at the age of seven accepted as a scholar by the Governors of the Grey
Coat School.

The Grey Coat School was a royal foundation "the principall designe of
which" was "to educate poor children in the principles of piety and
virtue, and thereby lay the foundations for a sober and Christian life".
Almost within the shadow of Westminster Abbey, the old building is still
to be seen---a red brick house, built in the Elizabethan manner, its
walls covered with grape-vine and Virginia creeper, standing in the
midst of a large garden and playground.

In the school, Thompson found himself a member of the class in
mathematics, and received such training in geography, algebra,
mechanics, and the art of navigation as was possible with the aid of
texts, many of which were at that time a century old. In those days
books were scarce and dear; and, for their general reading, the boys had
to be satisfied with such miscellaneous works as came their way. These
were passed eagerly from hand to hand, and as eagerly read and
discussed. Youthful imaginations were excited by the romantic adventures
of the Persian and Arabian tales, or by the travels of Robinson Crusoe
and Gulliver in strange lands and among strange peoples.

Within five minutes' walk of the school was the Abbey and its cloisters.
His hours of recreation David spent mainly in wandering through the
venerable pile, reading the history of England on the monuments of her
heroic dead, and drinking in the beauty of the architecture, especially
that of the noble Henry VII Chapel. On other occasions, when chance
offered, he would stroll through the Strand and Fleet Street as far east
as London Bridge or westward to Chelsea, rich in historical memories and
famous for its beautiful lawns. Other favourite haunts were St. James'
Park and Spring Gardens in Vauxhall, across the Thames. Forty years of
wandering through rock and forest, by plain and mountain, served merely
to render yet more vivid his boyish recollection of the city and its
parks "where all was beauty to the eye and verdure to the feet."

Thompson's school days, however, were now to be cut short. By the 20th
of May, 1784, the formalities were completed by which he was bound
apprentice to the Hudson's Bay Company for seven years; and he at once
embarked from the Port of London on the Company's ship, *Prince Rupert*,
en route for North America. The lines were cast off, and the vessel with
its cargo of goods for the Indian trade drifted lazily down stream with
the tide, carrying Thompson away for ever from the sights and sounds of
London, which he knew and loved so well.

The voyage was uneventful, except for the usual incidents that attended
the westward journey of the Company's annual fleet. Not a detail,
however, escaped the keen eye of the young traveller, unaccustomed as he
was to anything but the quiet life of the school, and thirsting to see
something of the world, which he knew only in the pages of Gulliver and
Robinson Crusoe. The ship sailed up the North Sea to Stromness in the
Orkneys, there to wait three weeks for the two vessels which were to
accompany her across the Atlantic, and to receive final instructions and
sailing orders. As they lay in the harbour of Stromness, Thompson's keen
eyes noted the strange life of the kelp-burners on shore, men, women,
and children who, half-naked, gathered the dripping sea-weed in baskets,
and lugged it on their shoulders to the kilns. Gazing at the rocky shore
line and the low, dark cottages with their smoky peat fires, which
dotted the barren hills, he was smitten with regret for the rich meadows
and woods of England, and for a moment he wished himself back amid the
scenes of his school life. Yet in his rambles ashore, the lad found much
to interest him. He observed with amusement the quaint habits of the
cottagers, who combined a brisk trade in smuggled liquor with lengthy
and solemn weekly devotions at the old-fashioned Kirk by the shores of
the harbour.

Sailing orders finally arrived from London, and the little fleet was
soon off on its hazardous journey across the stormy North Atlantic.
Presently the sight of icebergs drifting south with the Arctic current,
warned the crews that they were nearing Hudson Straits. It was a month
before they had worked their way through the floating ice of the
Straits; after which the three ships separated, one for the factories at
Moose and Albany rivers, the second for York, while the Prince Rupert,
with Thompson aboard, headed *for Churchill*, the most northerly of the
Company's settlements on the west side of the Bay. Before long, they
sighted the granite coast, which they followed southward. This ended at
Churchill in a low point of rock and sand, surmounted by the grim stone
battlements of Fort Prince of Wales, which two years before had been
gutted by the French in their raid on the Bay. Rounding this point, they
found themselves in the mouth of the Churchill, a noble stream, almost a
mile in breadth. Up the river they made their way for a distance of five
miles to a small bay at the head of the estuary, where they cast anchor
before the log huts of the still unfinished new fort.

The arrival of the annual ship was the event of the year. Hurried
preparations were made for discharging the cargo of provisions for the
factory and supplies for the Indian trade, and taking on board the
year's accumulation of furs, which were destined to adorn the persons of
the fashionable world of England and the Continent. In the midst of this
confusion, the new apprentice was taken ashore, and within ten days the
*Prince Rupert* sailed away, leaving him to face the rigours of his new
life on the dismal shores of Hudson Bay.

It was indeed a new life in which David Thompson found himself. Apart
from the officers, there was a staff of sixty artisans and servants in
the fort. These were all busy from dawn till dark; for, besides
conducting their trade with the Indians, they had to maintain themselves
as a community in an utterly barren land. At six each morning in summer,
and eight in winter, the duty bell summoned to their toil, accountant,
steward, armourer, shipwright, carpenter, cooper, blacksmith, mason,
tailor, and labourers. Assisted by his officers, the governor, gorgeous
in scarlet tunic and ruffles, his sword and pistols in his belt,
supervised the labours of the factory.

By the early part of October, the myriads of wild geese and ducks which
each summer lived in the vast swamps to the south of Churchill had
winged their way to warmer climes. The middle of the month saw the
marshes stiff with frost, and snow lying on the ground. The polar bear
made his appearance, waiting for the ice to extend some distance from
the shore, when he left to prey on the seal, his favourite food. By the
fifteenth of November, the broad and deep river was frozen solid from
bank to bank, not to break up until the middle of June in the following
year. Till the end of December, the staff were able to keep the yard of
the fort clear of snow. At that time, a three days' blow from the
north-east filled the fort with snow to a depth of six feet, with drifts
as high as the stockades. Thereafter it was enough if they could keep
paths cleared from one hut to another.

The cold was intense. The noise of rocks split by the frost broke the
silence of the night with a sound like that of a cannon shot. On the
interior walls of the still unfurnished huts, the rime collected to a
depth of four inches, and on this the shivering inhabitants threw pails
of water in order that it might form a coat of ice to increase the
warmth of the houses. Owing to the haste with which the huts had been
thrown up, there had been no time to lay in a sufficient supply of
firewood for the winter; and all the wood that could be gathered for
fuel allowed only one fire in the morning and one in the evening. During
the rest of the day, if the weather was bad, Thompson, with the others,
had to pace the guard room floor, muffled to the eyes in his beaver
coat, in order to keep himself from freezing. On clear days, however, he
passed his time in shooting grouse, and this activity he enjoyed except
for the tumbles in the snow and the sore feet and ankles that resulted
from his eager efforts to walk in snow-shoes.

The dreary winter seemed endless, when, in the middle of June, summer
burst with the suddenness of dawn in the Tropics, bringing with it
torments which made Thompson regret even the discomforts of winter.
"Hudson Bay," he says in his narrative, "is certainly a country which
Sinbad the sailor never saw, for he makes no mention of musketoes."
These pests rose from the marshes in clouds, driving man and beast to
distraction. The dogs in the fort howled in their agony, rolling
themselves on the ground and hiding in the pools. Even the fox was in a
fighting humour, barking and snapping; and, hungry though he was, he was
forced to seek shelter in his hole.

Such was Thompson's first year on the Bay. He had expected, when he
reached the Fort, to be employed as a clerk, but he soon found that his
only business was to amuse himself, "in winter growling at the cold, and
in the open season shooting gulls, duck, and plover and quarreling with
musketoes and sand flies." Fortunately, however, he had for company
three of the officers of the factory, the deputy governor, the
sloop-master, and the surgeon. To these gentlemen he felt himself
greatly indebted for the loan of various books on history and natural
science, by reading which he was able to put his hours of idleness to
profitable use.

The governor at that time was Samuel Hearne, a handsome giant with a
rubicund face. It was Hearne who in 1782 had surrendered without a blow
the great stone fort at the mouth of the river. That fort had cost the
Company forty years to build, and it was barely completed when Hearne
raised the white flag at the challenge of the French admiral, La
Pérouse. To the mind of young Thompson, this act was enough to stamp the
governor as a coward. It was, none the less, the same Hearne who had
succeeded in penetrating as far North as the mouth of the Coppermine
river, and was thus the first white man to reach the margin of the
Arctic ocean. Nevertheless, Thompson disliked him. Like so many others
at the close of the eighteenth century, Hearne was infected with the
doctrines of Voltaire, and his atheism shocked the sensitive mind of the
pious boy. To a lad of Thompson's ambition, the life of a hunter
afforded no sort of satisfaction, and he dreaded lest he should succumb
to the deadening influence of his surroundings. He complained to Hearne
that his lack of clerical employment might lead to the loss of his
penmanship, and was barely satisfied when the governor handed him an
invoice or two to copy, and gave him occupation for a few days upon the
manuscript of his *Journey to the North*.

The idleness of which Thompson complained was, however, to end before
long. With the arrival of the annual ship in 1785, orders came that the
young apprentice should proceed to York factory, the principal dépôt of
the Company, situated near the mouth of the Hayes river, one hundred and
fifty miles further up the Bay. South of the Churchill, the rim of
granite which hems the coast recedes for some miles inland, leaving a
vast waste of marshy alluvial between the hills and the water line.
Trees there are none, and the monotony of the landscape is relieved only
by boulders which the ice has scattered over the face of the land.

To journey on foot the length of this swamp, with two drunken Indians
alone for company, was enough to test the courage and reliance of a boy
of fifteen. Equipped with but a single blanket to protect him from the
chill of the September nights, the young David was ferried across the
river and put ashore on the south bank. The day was fine; but the
Indians had been given their usual gallon of grog on leaving the fort,
and they soon reduced themselves to a drunken stupor. A night in the
open, however, restored them to their senses. The next morning the party
made an early start, marching till evening without breakfast or dinner.
During the day, the Indians had shot a goose and three ducks. When they
finally came to something like a dry spot by the bank of a stream, the
wild fowl were hastily cooked and eaten; and the wearied travellers,
wrapped in their blankets, flung themselves on the ground to sleep.

Day after day, they trudged along the beach at high water mark, always
wet and muddy. Innumerable creeks which drained the swamp crossed their
path and interrupted their progress. Finally they came to the mighty
Kissiskatchewan or Nelson river, on the north bank of which the Indians
had laid up a canoe. Paddling across to the south shore, they crossed
the tongue of low land that separates the mouth of the Nelson from that
of the Hayes river; and were at last in York.

The governor to whom Thompson reported was the notorious Humphrey
Marten. This old tyrant was now in his twenty-fourth year of service
with the Company. Surrounded by his numerous native wives and a horde of
half-breed children, he ruled the fort with a rod of iron. The Indians
who visited the factory he would beat most cruelly, sending them away
with revenge burning in their hearts. In the fort, his subordinates felt
the weight of his unbridled temper; and they bowed to his brutality only
because they feared his vindictiveness. Amid such surroundings and under
such a taskmaster, Thompson passed the following year. He kept the
accounts of the factory in his neat handwriting, and joined with the
rest of the staff in the hunting necessary to supply the fort with food
during the winter.

CHAPTER II

HE FINDS HIS MÉTIER

His first two years of service brought nothing but disappointment and
disillusion to David Thompson. Vaguely sensible of his capacities, he
was conscious of nothing except that as yet he had been given no scope
to realize them. But in the summer of 1786 a new and important chapter
opened in his life. Fitted out with a trunk, a handkerchief, shoes,
shirts, a gun, powder, and a tin cup, he was included in a party of
forty-six "Englishmen" who left for the interior under the leadership of
Robert Longmore to establish trading posts on the Saskatchewan river to
the west of those already occupied by the Company.

For over one hundred years from the time when the merry monarch had
vested in them a monopoly of trading rights in the vast territory whose
waters drain into Hudson Bay, the "adventurers of England trading into
Hudson Bay" had maintained their factories on the coast, and allowed the
Indians from the interior to make their way to them for trade. Great
rivers flowed from all directions to the Bay; but the courses of these
rivers were still unknown to the map makers of the British Admiralty in
1784, the year in which David Thompson landed at Churchill. For Hudson
Bay is encircled from Labrador on the north-east to the Arctic on the
north-west by a giant horse shoe of Archaean rock, most of it clothed
with the dense northern forest; and so long as the red men were willing
to make the tedious journey up and down the rivers, the slumbering giant
on the Bay was content to accept the annual tribute of furs which they
flung at his feet. Each September, when the ships from London arrived,
the factories were crammed with pelts that meant a fortune on the
markets of the Continent; and the traders eagerly awaited a fresh supply
of guns, axes, and kettles for the Indian, and awls and beads for his
squaw, as well as the fire-water which made him the anxious though
reluctant slave of the great white chiefs on the Bay.

But the monopoly of trade to which the Company laid claim had not been
accepted without challenge. On the eastern face of North America, the
St. Lawrence river points like a finger to the heart of the continent,
and from the head of Lake Superior it is possible, by a comparatively
easy portage, to cross the height of land and descend through Rainy
lake, the Lake of the Woods, and the Winnipeg river to Lake Winnipeg.
Lake Winnipeg forms a vast collecting basin for the waters of the
interior, before they finally discharge through the Nelson river into
Hudson Bay. Thus it affords communication south and west by way of the
Red and Assiniboine rivers through the prairie country of southern
Manitoba, the Dakotas, and Minnesota; while, from the north west corner
of the lake, the Saskatchewan carries the traveller to its sources in
the Rockies. While therefore the English had waited for the Indians to
bring their furs down to them on the Bay, the French from Quebec had
pushed their way along these waters to the heart of the hunting grounds,
and the advance of these gallant adventurers was marked by a string of
forts that extended from Dulhut's post at the head of Lake Superior to
Fort La Jonquière near the site of Calgary.

The fall of Quebec in 1759 had brought with it the destruction of the
organized French fur trade, and the traders were scattered through the
wilds. But new groups of adventurers, mainly of Scotch descent, swarmed
westward from their headquarters at Montreal, and penetrated into the
wilderness further than the French had ever gone. By the year 1772, the
Montreal traders had crossed from the Saskatchewan to the still more
northerly Churchill river, and cut the line of communication ordinarily
used by the Indians of Lake Athabaska in their long journey to Hudson
Bay. The consolidation of the rival interests into one great firm--the
North West Company--was accomplished in 1784 at the very time of
Thompson's arrival in the West. This achievement brought vastly
increased strength to the Montreal traders by mitigating the evils of
their fierce competition. Thus the Hudson's Bay Company was threatened
with the loss of its fur supply at the same moment as the French war
interrupted its convoys, and La Pérouse swept the Bay, destroying the
posts at Churchill, York, and Albany.

Energetic measures were necessary if the lost trade was to be recovered.
As early as 1774, Samuel Hearne had taken the momentous step of founding
the first inland post of the Hudson's Bay Company at Cumberland House.
Situated on the Saskatchewan a few miles west of Lake Winnipeg,
Cumberland House stood, as it were, in the centre of a vast web of
waterways. "A canoe could start from this house, and with no portage of
more than a day's length could be launched on the Arctic ocean, Hudson
Bay, the Gulf of St. Lawrence or the Gulf of Mexico; and without much
greater interruption could be floated on to the Pacific ocean." Despite
the disasters of the French war, and the dreadful epidemic of smallpox
which in 1781 had swept across the West, decimating and demoralizing the
natives, the advance of the Company was continued by the establishment
of further posts along the Saskatchewan river. Thompson was thus drawn
into the forefront of the battle for furs, when he was included in
Longmore's party in the summer of '86.

On the 21st of July, the brigade of canoes left York factory for the
upper country. Longmore, the chief, was well qualified for the task of
leading the expedition. For many years he had served as lieutenant to
Tomison, the "chief inland" of the dépôt at Cumberland House. Here he
had acquired the difficult knack of dealing with the Indians, besides
earning their love and respect. Thompson's immediate superior was
Mitchell Oman, an old and experienced trader of the Company, to whom he
had been assigned as clerk. Oman could neither read nor write, but he
nevertheless impressed the lad by the unusual quality of his curious and
inquisitive mind. During the tedious paddle into the interior, he drew
from the pages of a retentive memory endless tales of the Company's
early activities inland. "In those days," he declared, "our situation
was by no means pleasant. The Indians were very numerous, and although
by far the greater part behaved well, and were kindly to us, yet among
such a number there will always be found bad men. To protect ourselves
from them, we had to get a respectable chief to stay with us and assist
us in trading, and prevent as much as possible the demands of these
men." His valuable reminiscences were not lost upon the boy.

As the boatmen slowly worked their way up the river, Thompson's eyes
gazed for the first time on the country he was afterwards to know so
well. Their course lay up the Hayes river, and thence, by way of Lake
Winnipeg, to the Saskatchewan. Progress at first was rapid, even against
the stream, for they were still in the low and marshy country that
fringes the south-west corner of the Bay. Presently, however, they
encountered the first of the many rapids which mark the descent of the
river to the sea. At each of these, with monotonous reiteration, the
packs were all heaved ashore and shouldered along the rugged path of the
portage to the higher level of the river. At the same time, the face of
the landscape suddenly altered. The marshy alluvial gave way to naked
granite, and they entered the belt of dark and gloomy northern forest.
As they passed through the heart of the rocky country, the character of
the river was also changed. From point to point the stream was held back
by ledges of granite which broke its progress, giving rise to an
irregular chain of wide and deep lakes. Through these lakes they
threaded their way until, reaching the end of the granite country, they
saw before them the broad expanse of Lake Winnipeg, the "bad water" of
the Indians. Sixty miles along its northern coast brought them to the
point where the Saskatchewan, after a swift and unbroken course of over
one thousand miles through the plains, plunges in a long series of
cascades into the lake. Having portaged past these, and wended their way
through the alluvial flats of Cedar lake, they came at last to
Cumberland House, and the first stage of their journey was accomplished.

Their objective was a point on the Saskatchewan about fifty miles above
the present site of Battleford. As they continued their journey westward
from Cumberland House, the forest gradually gave way to open country,
and they found themselves in the vast expanse of the plains, dotted here
and there with clumps of trees--the country of the bison, the antelope,
and the red deer. Passing the forks of the river, they came to the site
which the keen eye of Longmore had selected. There, on the northern bank
of the stream, they cleared the ground and ran up a series of log huts,
surrounded by a wooden stockade--the future Manchester House. Except for
a solitary post which the North-Westers had for three years maintained
about forty miles further up stream, Thompson had now reached the limit
of country at that time familiar to civilized men. To the west stretched
the unknown wilderness, which it was his destiny, in considerable
measure, to explore.

The object of the new post was to secure the trade of the natives of the
plains; and during the following winter David was busy learning the
complicated ritual of Indian barter. In the course of a year he had so
far mastered his duties that he was selected to lead a party of six men
across country to the south branch of the Saskatchewan, in order to open
friendly relations with the Piegan and Blackfeet Indians whose camps lay
along the banks of that stream. Each man had a horse, and among them
they carried a small assortment of goods. The duties of the young
diplomat were to find the camps of the Piegans and winter among them, in
order to induce them to hunt for furs and to make pemmican or dried
buffalo meat for the traders. He was to persuade as many as possible to
travel to the post for trade. With those who were unwilling to do so, he
was to bargain for furs.

The party set forth in October, under their seventeen-year-old leader.
The trail they followed led through a fine rolling country, everywhere
clothed with short grass, and dotted with islands of poplar and birch.
For twenty-three days they rode without seeing any animals other than a
chance bull-bison which they shot for food. To the south of the Bow
river they found an Indian camp pitched in a spot where the tender grass
afforded rich pasture for the buffalo; but the plains, which were
ordinarily black with moving herds, were at this time strangely
deserted. After several moves, they finally struck a large encampment of
Piegans near the present site of Calgary. Sending some of his men back
to Manchester House, Thompson settled down in this camp to spend the
winter.

The Piegan, Blood, and Blackfeet Indians were three allied tribes of
Algonquin stock who had emerged from the northern forest and taken
possession of the plains, driving their enemies, the Kootenay, Salish,
and Snake Indians, before them to the mountains. Since the white men had
come to trade on the river, they had advanced from the Eagle hills in
western Saskatchewan to the very foot of the Rockies. This rapid
conclusion of an age-long struggle for the mastery of the grazing
country had been due to the fire-arms which they had procured from the
traders.

The manners and customs of the confederate tribes were in keeping with
their war-like disposition and constant danger. Unlike the scattered
forest Indians, they lived in large camps, and without yielding their
traditional liberty to the control of a single authority, they had
nevertheless evolved a rudimentary form of social organization. Hunters
of the bison, they were in constant need of horses. Horse-stealing was
thus among them an honourable pursuit, and their raids extended far to
the south and west. During the winter of Thompson's stay among them, a
raid on the Snakes took a part of two hundred and fifty warriors a
distance of one thousand, five hundred miles to the south-west, as was
testified by the thirty well-bred animals that were brought back to
camp, and the Spanish saddles and bridles that lay thrown about among
the tents.

Of the three allied tribes, the Piegans occupied the most exposed
position, and consequently led the most precarious and watchful life.
From boyhood they were trained in arms, and their martial bearing and
enterprising character produced a strong impression upon Thompson. They
had an hereditary civil chief or "orator", as he was called, who
presided at all councils except those of war. Arrayed in his splendid
mantle of otter skin, he paced the camp each day three hours after
sunset, reciting in a loud voice the news which his couriers had
gathered, announcing in particular where the herds of bison were feeding
and what direction they were taking. The war chief, on the other hand,
was a self-made man, whose power and influence had developed from his
conduct in war. Kootanae Appee, as he was called, was a magnificent
giant, six feet six inches in height, and was the father of twenty-two
warriors, no less tall and sinewy than himself. In after years, when
Thompson was battling his way south along the Columbia river, the bond
of friendship which he now forged with this old chief stood him in good
stead.

The chief in whose tent Thompson passed the winter bore the name of
Saukamappee (Young Man). Saukamappee was broad of shoulder and strong of
limb. Old age had not bowed his grey head, nor had a troubled life
obliterated the mild and playful expression of his countenance. During
the long winter evenings, he entertained his guest with reminiscences
that went back for fifty years. From him, Thompson learned of the Indian
methods of fighting before the time of firearms, of the first
importation of these deadly weapons from the distant factory at York, of
the introduction of the horse among the Blackfeet, and of the dreadful
effects of the small-pox epidemic in '81, of which Saukamappee himself
had been a victim. While Thompson thus learned the history of the tribes
among whom he was staying, he practised himself in the use of their
language. His note books contain long lists of Indian words with their
English equivalents, gathered from the Piegans and from other tribes
whom he encountered.

The winter over, Thompson returned to the post, from which he was sent
to Cumberland House in the summer of 1789. Here he began to keep a
careful meteorological journal, noting two or three times daily the
temperature, the strength and direction of the wind, and the general
character of the climate. He also began a series of astronomical
observations, as the result of which he was able to determine the exact
latitude and longitude of Cumberland House. This post was thus the first
of a series of widely scattered points fixed by him on the map of
British North America. It was then, too, that he acquired the large
brass sextant which was to be his constant companion for years to come.

Having made this start, Thompson attempted in the following summer to
make a survey of the canoe route from Cumberland House to York factory,
by way of the Saskatchewan and the Hayes rivers. In the autumn, he
returned to Cumberland House. While there, he had the good fortune to
meet Philip Turnor, the man without whose guidance and help Thompson
could hardly have realized his future career.

For several years, the Colonial Office had been urging the Hudson's Bay
Company to proceed with the survey of the vast territory over which it
exercised sway; and to satisfy the pressing demand of the government,
the Company had engaged Philip Turnor as astronomer and surveyor.
Possessed of a sound theoretical training, Turnor had been employed in
England as one of the compilers of the *Nautical Almanac*; and since
1776 he had added to his qualifications a wide practical experience
drawn from numerous surveys throughout the region of the Bay. Here was a
man who could solve Thompson's doubts and difficulties, and correct the
deficiencies of his education for the work which he had in view. An
eager pupil, Thompson sat at the feet of Turnor during the winter of
1790; and when, in the following spring, he returned to York factory, it
was as a man with his mind made up. If a man knows clearly what he wants
and has the intelligence and perseverance to pursue his aims, no
obstacle, not even such as these which confronted Thompson, can keep him
from attaining his goal.

Thereafter Thompson and his beloved instruments were inseparable
companions in journeys that carried him for thousands of miles through
the wildest parts of the unknown west. By day and night, he was an
object of wonder to his French-Canadian and Indian followers, as, armed
with his sextant, telescope, compass, and other instruments, he took
observations on the sun, moon, and stars. While he sought to determine
the position of rivers, lakes, and mountains, to be recorded on the map
which was to be his life's work, his activities suggested to their
superstitious minds the idea that he was in communication with powers
not of this world, and earned him the title which he bore among them,
Koo-Koo-Sint, "The man who looks at the stars."

CHAPTER III

TRADER, SURVEYOR, EXPLORER

When Thompson returned to York factory in the spring of 1791, it was to
find that great changes had taken place at the fort. Five years before,
the tyrannous sway of old Humphrey Marten had come to an end, and he had
been succeeded as governor by Joseph Colen. This man was to direct
Thompson's movements during the next six years.

The new governor was a man of unquestioned ability; but his jealous and
suspicious temperament made him work at cross purposes with the governor
of Churchill, and brought him into frequent conflict with Tomison at
Cumberland House. He had never caught the spirit of the aggressive
policy initiated by Samuel Hearne, and preferred to develop the fur
trade with the Indians who came down to the coast for trade, rather than
to follow them to their hunting grounds. In his reports to the directors
in London, he endeavoured to excuse his lack of enterprise by hurling
vague accusations at his colleagues; while his subordinates, men like
Thompson and Malcolm Ross, were irritated and provoked by the lack of
support from headquarters which constantly frustrated their efforts to
push forward the work of exploring the more remote interior.

The seven years of David's apprenticeship were now at an end, and he was
engaged at a good salary as trader and surveyor to the Company. He was
not yet, however, given an opportunity of practising his profession. The
previous spring, an ice-jam at the mouth of the Hayes river had caused
the water to rise, flooding the low land on which the factory was
situated; and for a year or more, Thompson had to assist Colen in moving
the fort to its present site on a high clay bank about a quarter mile
further up stream.

Meanwhile Philip Turnor had returned from a journey to Lake Athabaska,
and the report of his explorations had reached the directors in London.
Proceeding from Cumberland House, he had worked his way north through
Amisk and Pelican lakes to Frog Portage, a distance of one hundred
miles. After crossing the portage, he found himself in the basin of the
upper Churchill river. This stream he ascended as far as Isle à la
Crosse, and thence he made his way through Buffalo lake and Lake la
Roche to the Methy Portage. This portage marks the divide between the
waters that flow eastward to Hudson Bay and those that discharge through
the Mackenzie into the Arctic ocean. Crossing the portage, he descended
the Clearwater river to its junction with the Athabaska, whose broad
stream soon carried him to the lake of that name. This was the regular
route followed by the Indians of the far north in their journeys to
Hudson Bay.

Turnor's report filled the directors with a desire to dispute the trade
of Lake Athabaska with the men of the North West Company; and they
bombarded Colen with instructions to send Ross and Thompson to that
region. But to Colen's mind there was a more pressing necessity nearer
home. The North-Westers had entered the rocky belt to the south-west of
York, and had monopolized trade throughout the irregular series of lakes
and rivers which form the tributaries of the Nelson and lower Churchill,
thus challenging the "English" on their home front itself. Accordingly
Colen ignored the instructions from London, and despatched Ross and
Thompson into this "muskrat country," as it was called, with orders to
build posts at strategic points and restore the trade of the Company.

On the 5th of September, 1792, Thompson set forth with two canoes on his
first independent command. Rounding the point from York factory, the
canoes swung into the broad channel of the Nelson river. By the end of
the month they were well above Split lake, Thompson making a survey as
they moved along. At this point one of the canoes turned aside to ascend
Grass river, while Thompson with the other continued along the main
stream until he reached the upper end of Sipiwisk lake. Here in a little
cove formed by two projecting points of rock, with the dark spruce
forest at his back and a view to the south west over the island-studded
lake, he built his first trading post, and settled down to face the
winter in a country almost devoid of fish and game.

His heart, however, was set on exploration. From the Indians he learned
that, besides the well-known route which had been followed by Turnor to
Lake Athabaska, there existed another, north from the Churchill river to
Reindeer lake, and thence westward by way of the Black river to the east
end of Lake Athabaska. This route he made up his mind to explore.

Accordingly, when the ice had cleared from the rivers, he set forth
alone without any help or encouragement from headquarters. Descending to
the lower end of Sipiwisk lake, he turned to the left and passed by a
series of portages through Wintering, Red Paint and Burntwood lakes to
the Missinippi or Churchill river, up which he paddled for a distance of
thirty-three miles. But the Indian guides whom he had expected to meet
failed to put in an appearance, and he was forced to turn back. He
therefore descended through Burntwood lake and the Nelson river to York
factory.

Colen had given the English directors to understand that he planned to
send Ross and Thompson to the Athabaska country; and with the arrival of
the annual ship in the autumn of '93, they wrote that they expected much
good to follow from the projected expedition, and that they wished
William Cook, who had accompanied David into the Muskrat country the
previous autumn, to join with the others in the invasion of the far
north. But Cook was not recalled from his post on Split lake, and Ross
and Thompson were sent up the Saskatchewan to Cumberland House. Thence
Thompson was despatched, not to Lake Athabaska, as he had expected, but
westward along the river to a new post called Buckingham House, from
which he rode still further west to the Beaver hills near the future
site of Fort Augustus (Edmonton). Returning, he surveyed the
Saskatchewan east from Buckingham House to the Forks, and from the Forks
he resurveyed the rest of the river. From Cumberland House, he explored
a new route through Goose, Reed, and Burntwood lakes to the Nelson, and
thus opened up a direct line of communication between the dépôt at
Cumberland House and York factory, much superior to the old course by
way of Lake Winnipeg and the Hayes river.

Thompson's reappearance at York without having been to the Athabaska
country made it necessary for Colen to do no little explaining to the
impatient London directors. In a long letter to them, he hinted that it
was Tomison who was responsible for the fiasco. Tomison, he said, had
refused to pass his word for the advance of wages promised by the
Council to those who would volunteer to accompany the expedition. Ross,
he declared, was utterly disgusted with the repeated disappointments,
and would have returned at once to England, had not Thompson prevailed
upon him to make one last trial, this time by way of Reindeer lake.
Thompson and Ross, he added, were being fitted out with canoes and
supplies at York, and would be sent up the Nelson river track. The
directors were deceived, and swallowed their disappointment, hoping to
hear that the difficulties which stood in the way of the Athabaska
expedition had been successfully overcome.

But, even now, Thompson was sent, not to the North, but back once more
to the Muskrat country, this time to Reed lake. Here, in a district
comparatively rich in fish, game, and furs, he built a house, and spent
one of the coldest winters in the history of the Hudson Bay. While
hunting and trading, he also prepared for the directors of the Company,
the maps and surveys of the country which he had already traversed. In
July of the following year, 1795, he paddled down the river on what was
to be his last visit to York.

On this occasion Colen was absent on a trip to England, but the factory
was seething with discontent. Thompson found the staff impatiently
waiting, in order that he, the youngest and bravest among them, might
take the lead in drawing up a statement of the grievances which they
suffered under Colen's rule. This office he accepted, although with some
hesitation on account of the absence of the governor. Assisted by his
friend the surgeon, he drew up a statement which Colen declared
seriously prejudiced him in the eyes of the directors; although,
according to Thompson, not one half of the evils were even mentioned of
which the staff had cause to complain. Thompson was not ashamed of the
part he had played in this mutinous outbreak. As soon as he had left the
service, he took the opportunity of explaining to his old chief that he
was the author of the protest which had so much displeased him. "Many of
us," his letter concluded, "acknowledge with readiness that you have
some good qualities, and I once had the greatest respect for you; I have
some yet, but----it is not my wish to say those things which I know you
do not wish to hear. How is it, Sir, that everyone who has once wished
you well should turn to be indifferent to you, and even some to hate
you, although they are constant in their other friendships?--there must
be a defect somewhere. The fact is, that from your peculiar manner of
conduct, you are also one of those unfortunate men who will have many an
acquaintance, but never a real friend."

Thompson's final break with Colen did not, however, occur until two
years later. He turned in his furs, and without waiting, except to
secure supplies for the coming winter, went back to his duties in the
Muskrat country. This time he built a house far to the north on Duck
Portage, the link connecting Burntwood lake with the Churchill river.
When spring opened, instead of returning to York, he made ready for his
dash to Lake Athabaska.

Formal permission had reached him from Colen, sanctioning his venture
into the unknown wilds. This, however, meant nothing, because it was not
accompanied by help of any kind. At that moment, indeed, the Company was
seriously crippled for lack of men to keep up the few inland trading
posts that then existed, for the war which was raging between England
and France had drained the Orkney islands of all men who were fit for
service in the army and navy. The few miserable dwarfs who could be
obtained for the fur trade excited the contempt of even the Indians.

Thompson, nevertheless, was not to be deterred from his enterprise. He
proceeded at once to Fairford House, the trading post kept by Malcolm
Ross on the Churchill near the mouth of the Reindeer river, where he
hoped to get some assistance. To his great disappointment, he found that
not a man could be spared from the trade in furs. There were, however, a
few Chepawyan Indians lingering about the fort and from among these he
managed to engage two young men. Kozdaw and "Paddy" had hunted for two
winters in the country he was about to explore, although neither of them
had ever been on the rivers and lakes in summer. Their only practice in
canoes had been to lie offshore in the lakes on a calm day, watching for
the deer to take refuge from the flies, and this gave them no experience
of the currents and rapids of rivers; yet, such as they were, Thompson
had no choice but to take them.

The first task was to construct a canoe. Having searched the forest for
a supply of birch bark, they made a boat seventeen feet in length. Into
this they packed their meagre outfit, a fowling piece with forty balls,
five pounds of shot, three flints and five pounds of powder, a fishing
net, a hatchet and a small tent of grey cotton. These articles, together
with a few handfuls of beads, rings, and awls for trading, made up their
terribly inadequate equipment.

In the grey dawn of a June morning, 1796, Thompson launched his canoe on
the turbid waters of the Missinippi. The party advanced rapidly, making
a survey as they went. For supplies they relied on their solitary net
and gun. Turning into the Reindeer river, they worked their way north
against a moderate current to Reindeer lake. A hundred miles up the west
coast of this lake brought them to a point clothed with tolerably good
pines. This point Thompson noted as a suitable site for building a
trading post on his return.

The whole distance through which they had come had a barren, rocky
appearance, relieved only by patches of stunted birch, aspen, and
spruce. Since there was little or no soil, the trees stood with their
roots interlaced like the trees on the frozen lands of Hudson Bay; and,
like them, they were kept moist in summer by the wet moss with which
their roots were covered. Through wide stretches the forest fires had
passed, leaving the country unsightly and ghostlike, and destroying the
wild animals of the forest. Thompson was now in fact approaching the
northern limit of trees, beyond which stretch the barren lands, the home
of the musk ox and caribou.

In order to avoid the wide circuit of the Cochrane river, which flows to
Reindeer lake from Lake Wollaston, the guides directed Thompson up a
stream that emptied from the west a few miles north of his point of
pines. From the head of this stream there was a passage by a series of
ponds and brooks to the south end of Wollaston lake. But the water was
low, and they were forced to carry their packs for the better part of
fifty miles, stumbling over the rocks and wading through the marshes,
while clouds of mosquitoes buzzed about their defenceless heads. It was
a welcome relief when they launched out on the clear and deep waters of
Lake Wollaston, which they crossed without trouble to the Black river.
Here they made camp on the evening of June 23, and rested while Thompson
took observations and made up the notes of his survey.

Two days later they were once more under way. Lake Wollaston, as
Thompson discovered, was situated on the height of land between the
basins of Hudson Bay and the Mackenzie river. Part of its waters
discharged eastward and south into Reindeer lake, while part flowed
westward through the Black river into Lake Athabaska. From this curious
circumstance, the lake was known to the Indians as "Lake Manito," and
was considered to be of supernatural character. Entering the Black
river, the party passed at first through the quiet reaches of the upper
river, in a wretched country of solitude, where the wild laugh of the
loon alone woke the echoes of the barren hills. Presently the banks
closed in, and as the current stiffened, they had to paddle vigorously
to avoid the projecting rocks. Finally an expansion of the stream
brought them to Black lake. It was during this stretch that they came
upon the only human beings they had so far encountered--five tents of
Chepawyans, hunting and fishing in an otherwise deserted land.

They could afford but one day to enjoy the hospitality of the Indians.
From Black lake, the river tumbles in two wild cascades to the level of
Lake Athabaska. A series of rapids, cutting through a high hill, warned
them that they were approaching the first of the falls. For half a mile
they shot the rapids to a point where the river is compressed within a
channel only twelve yards in width. At the end of this channel, the
current rushed against a projecting ledge of rock with such force that
the whole river seemed to be turned up from its bottom. The dashing of
the water against the rocks, the deep roar of the torrent, the hollow
sound of the fall, in the midst of the dark, high, and frowning hills,
made a sight so grand and terrible that Kozdaw and Paddy were
awe-struck, and offered their simple tributes to the manito of the
fall--the one a bit of tobacco, the other a ring. Past this fall the
travellers descended by a well-beaten native trail. A second series of
rapids and a second fall brought them to the last lap of their journey,
and they paddled quietly for six miles into the east end of Lake
Athabaska. Here they passed the night, resting from their dangers,
toils, and sufferings under a pine tree which had been lopped and marked
by Philip Turnor in his survey of 1791.

Thompson's heart was thrilled by the thought that he had finally
accomplished the journey on which for the last five years his heart had
been set, and that in so doing he had blazed a trail through the
wilderness over ground which the feet of white men had never trod
before. He was sobered, however, by the prospect of the long and
difficult journey home. His net and gun afforded but a scanty supply of
food, and should these fail him, there was but slight hope of succour.
But gloomy as were his forebodings, it was well that he did not know
what lay before him.

Half way up the Black river, he encountered one of the rapids which was
broken about the middle by a twelve-foot fall. Portaging past the fall,
he attempted to "track" the canoe up the rest of the rapid. The two
Indians were ashore tugging at the tow-line, while Thompson in the canoe
tried to steer and at the same time direct their movements. Near the
head of the rapid there was at the water's edge a tree which blocked
their progress, and as the Indians stood hesitating which side of it
they should pass, the canoe sheered off across the current. An upset was
inevitable, had not Thompson waved to the Indians to let go the line and
leave him to his fate. Springing to the bow, he cut the rope off short
with the clasp knife which he kept in his waistcoat pocket, and got the
head of the canoe around into the stream just in time to take the plunge
over the cataract. For an instant, Thompson was buried beneath the
boiling water at the foot of the fall. Striking his feet against the
bottom, he pushed himself to the surface close to the upturned canoe.
This he seized and dragged through shallow water to the beach. The
Indians came rushing to his assistance, and, while he lay on the rocks,
bruised, bleeding, and exhausted by his exertions, they searched the
shore below the rapids for what could be recovered of their precious
kit.

The gun, the axe, and the tent had remained fastened in the canoe. In
half an hour's time, the Indians brought back the cork-lined box
containing Thompson's instruments and the maps of his survey, together
with their three paddles and a pewter basin. Not one moment was to be
lost. Thompson's body was naked except for his shirt and a thin linen
vest, and his companions were in like condition. The small tent they
tore into three pieces with which to wrap themselves as a defence
against flies by day and chill by night. Worse still, Thompson found as
he painfully raised himself from the rocks that the flesh of his foot
had been torn away by the impact of the jagged stones of the river bed,
and a part of his share of the tent had to be taken to bind the wound.

The first duty was to repair the canoe, and the Indians were sent to the
woods to procure gum from the pines. The question was then how to light
a fire, for they had neither flint nor steel. Thompson pointed to his
gun from which they took the flint, and with the steel blade of his
pocket knife they struck a spark. When the gum was melted, they repaired
the canoe and carried their kit above the fall and rapids. The Indians
shouldered the canoe, while behind them the wounded leader hobbled
painfully along under the burden of gun, axe, and sextant case.

Night had fallen before they found time to make a fire and warm
themselves. Their situation was enough to strike terror into the boldest
heart. Destitute, almost naked, and suffering from the weather, they
faced a journey of three hundred miles through a barren country. Yet
Thompson did not despair. For two days they paddled and portaged up the
river without a bite to eat. On the afternoon of the second day they saw
two gulls hovering over a reedy bay as if to protect their young. They
found the nest and in it three young gulls, but the few ounces of meat
which they were able to pick from their miserable carcases sufficed only
to sharpen their hunger.

The next day as they went along, Thompson remembered an eagle's nest on
the banks of a small lake before them. When they came to the lake they
found the nest in the spreading branches of a birch tree, about sixteen
feet above the ground. Kozdaw had barely time to climb to the nest
before the old birds arrived. Paddy and Thompson, with shouts and
stones, succeeded in preventing them from attacking Kozdaw, while the
latter threw the two young eagles to the ground. The birds fought with
beak and claw for their lives, but were finally killed and flung into
the canoe.

In the evening, they opened the eagles by the gleam of the camp fire,
and divided the meat and yellow fat into three equal portions. While
Kozdaw roasted his meat and oiled his body with the fat, the others ate
only the fat, reserving the meat for next day. In the night they were
both awakened by a violent dysentery, which continued to plague them for
many days, although a strong infusion of a certain dried moss, known as
Labrador tea, brought them some relief.

Day by day they continued their voyage, subsisting on the wretched
crow-berries of the far north. By the sixteenth of July, Thompson and
Paddy were like skeletons, from hunger, dysentery, and cold. On that day
Thompson scratched what he thought was his dying message on a scrap of
birch bark which Kozdaw was to carry back with him to civilization. Late
in the afternoon, as they paddled weakly and painfully along, they came
upon two tents of Chepawyans. The savages pitied their condition and
restored them with broth. From them Thompson procured some provisions, a
flint and a few rounds of ammunition, together with a pair of shoes each
for himself and his men. Thus they were able to proceed on their
journey, and arrived without further adventure at Fairford House after
an absence of thirty-one days.

At Fairford House Thompson was joined by Malcolm Ross with a stock of
provisions for the northern trade, and together they returned to build a
trading post on Reindeer lake. Along with the supplies, Ross brought a
letter from Colen to Thompson, containing a curt order that he should
cease his surveys and explorations. This was his reward.

CHAPTER IV

WITH THE NORTH-WESTERS

The chilly reception which Thompson met after his return from Lake
Athabaska was enough to quench the enthusiasm of any man. He might have
lain down under the blow. In that case he would no doubt have ended his
days as an obscure and broken-spirited trader, embittered by his fate,
but powerless so late in life to change it. Another course, however, was
open to him, if he had the courage and self-reliance to take it. This
was to throw up his post with the Hudson's Bay Company, and seek
employment in other quarters where his talents would meet with the
recognition they deserved.

In the long winter evenings at Reindeer lake, he weighed the problem
before him. Colen, his chief, had undoubtedly failed to appreciate the
value of his work. Worse still, he had hampered it, since for the last
two years he had neglected even to supply Thompson with the *Nautical
Almanac* so necessary for his surveys. But behind Colen stood the
Company. How far had they given him the sympathy and encouragement which
he needed? The directors, he felt, might easily have had the northern
part of the continent surveyed as far as the Pacific coast, and thus
greatly extended the range of their trade. This they could have
accomplished at trifling expense, for in England there were numbers of
highly-trained naval officers on half pay, who would have jumped at the
chance of employment. But any explorations which they had undertaken
were solely at the behest of the Colonial Office. His feelings toward
the Company may not have been altogether justified. Nevertheless, he
could only conclude that there was little or no future for him in the
service. With Thompson to think was to act. On the 28th of May, 1797, he
left his post on Reindeer lake and walked south through the bush for
seventy-five miles to the nearest house of the North-Westers. After ten
days spent there, he proceeded to Grand Portage, the headquarters of the
Company at the west end of Lake Superior, in order that he might offer
his services to the merchants from Canada.

Situated on a small bay at the mouth of Pigeon river, Grand Portage had
been for several years the general dépôt for the trader of the North
West Company, the lair from which those "sly wolves of the North" had
sallied forth to work such havoc with the trade of the English on Hudson
Bay. Along the shore ran a line of docks, which each summer were piled
high, now with the parcels of merchandise for the interior trade, now
with the packs of furs which had been gathered from the distant trading
posts for the market in the east. Along the bay front and up the bank of
the river sprawled the village of log huts in which dwelt the half-breed
families of the French voyageurs.

The fort itself was in keeping with the dignity of the Company and the
magnitude of its operations. A palisade eighteen feet high enclosed the
great square in which stood the various offices--storehouses, servants'
quarters, and lodgings for the clerks. In the centre of the courtyard
towered the main building, a stout log structure surmounted by a high
balcony. This contained the apartments of the partners, and the great
hall, its walls covered with portraits of the leading members of the
Company in all the glory of ruffles and scarlet coats. Here took place
the grave deliberations of the merchants, and here each evening they
dined in solemn state. The stone powder magazine, the jail with its
barred windows, and the sentry in the archway of the great gate lent a
touch of grimness to the picture of this far-flung outpost of commerce.

At Grand Portage, Thompson received a warm welcome from those of the
partners who were at the time present in the fort. On his way down he
had met Roderick Mackenzie, cousin to the famous Sir Alexander, and
Simon Fraser, soon to win distinction as the discoverer of the Fraser
river. At the post he found the Honourable William McGillivray,
prominent in the councils of the Company, and Sir Alexander Mackenzie
himself. Sir Alexander had been the first white man to descend the
Mackenzie river to its mouth, and he had blazed a trail across the Rocky
Mountains to the Pacific. He had but recently returned from England,
wearing the honour of knighthood which he had earned for his
explorations. All of these gentlemen impressed Thompson as being men of
enterprise and vision, and among them he found the liberal and public
spirit which in his former employers he had sought in vain.

At that time, questions of serious import were agitating the minds of
the partners. By the treaty which closed the American Revolutionary War,
the boundary between the British dominions and the territories of the
United States had been fixed as a line drawn from the northwest corner
of the Lake of the Woods to the source of the Mississippi, which was
then thought to lie considerably north of its true position. Nine years
later, the forty-ninth parallel of latitude had been accepted as the
boundary; and by the Treaty of Amity and Commerce subsequently passed,
it had been agreed that all British trading posts south of this line
should be withdrawn. This made it necessary for the Company to fix at
once the location of their houses on the upper Red river, and
incidentally if possible to discover the true source of the Mississippi.
The partners were also anxious to have a route surveyed to the
headwaters of the Missouri river, where there existed the villages of an
Indian people who got their living from the cultivation of the soil. The
scientific spirit of the merchants was shown by their further desire to
search for the fossil bones of prehistoric animals and any monuments
which might throw light on the earlier condition of the regions
surveyed. Finally, they wished to ascertain the courses of the rivers
and the situation of the lakes, in order that they might rearrange their
network of trading houses so as to cover more completely the territory
under their sway.

Thompson's arrival came therefore at an opportune moment. He was
promptly engaged as astronomer and surveyor to the company, and the
partners and agents all agreed to send orders to their various trading
posts that he should be given any assistance he required. In August, the
great canoes arrived from Montreal with the goods for the Indian trade.
When these were unloaded, the merchandise was assorted and made up in
parcels each of ninety pounds' weight, so that the boatmen might be able
to shoulder them over the portages. These were then taken in charge by
the various agents and their shouting crews of voyageurs. Five days of
hard labour were needed for the carry over Grand Portage to the upper
waters of Pigeon river. When all was ready, Thompson climbed the long
trail from the lake. Armed with his precious instruments, he joined the
Swan river brigade of four canoes, and embarked on what was to be the
longest, fastest and most brilliant piece of survey in his whole career.

Progress was tedious until the party had crossed the watershed beyond
which all streams flow north-westward into Lake Winnipeg and thence into
Hudson Bay. They then made a rapid descent through Rainy lake and the
Lake of the Woods to the Winnipeg river (the mad or foaming water of the
Indians), down which they paddled and portaged to its mouth. Coasting
along the south shore of Lake Winnipeg under the shelter of its low
limestone cliffs, they came to the mouth of the Dauphin or Little
Saskatchewan river. The ascent of this stream brought them to the waters
of Lake Manitoba. They had only to paddle to the head of this lake, and
from thence the length of Lake Winnipegosis, in order to find themselves
at the mouth of the Swan river. Twelve miles up this stream was their
objective--Swan River House.

As they approached their goal, Thompson observed that the land was
rapidly improving in character; until at Swan River House he found
himself in the heart of a fine varied country of hill and plain,
woodland and meadow--the beaver country *par excellence*. Here on every
side were to be found traces of the labours of these industrious
animals; the dammed brooks, the flooded meadows, the dome-like huts in
which they lived and the burrows to which they fled for refuge when
attacked. All this fine country was the hunting ground of the Cree
Indians, the possession of which they had from time immemorial disputed
with the beaver, the bison, and the red deer.

When the early French traders arrived, they brought with them chisels,
knives, and other implements of iron. The Indians, having got possession
of these, were able to cut through the dams, drain the waters of the
ponds, and thus expose the huts and burrows of the beaver. Then,
assisted by their small half-savage dogs, they would chisel their way
through the thick walls of the huts until they came to the beaver. Since
there was a ready market for his skin among the French traders, they
soon became rich, and for several years men, women, and children were
gay with brooches, ear-rings and beads, and gaudy with scarlet coats.

But then the Nipissing and Iroquois Indians, who had exhausted their own
countries, spread to the north and west. Armed with their new steel
traps, they began a war of annihilation upon the beaver; and by the year
1797, when Thompson travelled through the Swan river district, almost
the whole of that extensive region was denuded. The short phase of
prosperity was over. The greed of the white man and the improvidence of
the Indian had done their work, and while the native might still hope to
gain a bare subsistence from hunting the deer and the bison, he was once
more poor, thus to remain for ever.

Over this country, Thompson made a series of rapid excursions by horse
and canoe, in order that he might fix the location of the various
trading houses of the North West Company. In the course of five weeks,
he had crossed to the basins of the Red Deer and the Assiniboine rivers,
and surveyed each of these streams to its source. He then descended the
Assiniboine to its confluence with the Souris, near where the city of
Brandon now stands. Here toward the end of November he put up at
Assiniboine House, which was at that time kept by a trader called John
McDonnell.

McDonnell's house was the natural point of departure for the journey
across to the Mandan Villages on the upper Missouri. The trail lay in a
south-westerly direction along the south bank of the Souris river as far
as the great bend, and from thence across the open plains to the heights
of the Missouri. As the country was generally treeless, the custom of
travellers was to move from point to point where patches of wood growing
in the river bottom or at the higher levels afforded firewood and
shelter for the night.

Winter had come, and three inches of snow lay upon the ground, making
travel both disagreeable and dangerous. Worse still, the road passed
through the hunting grounds of the Sioux Indians, those wild riders of
the plains who lived by pursuit of the bison. The Sioux had lately
suffered the loss of several men at the hands of the Mandan Indians; and
these losses they blamed on the whites who had supplied the Mandans with
guns and ammunition. They were therefore in a very menacing temper, and
had determined to waylay, scalp, and plunder the next party of traders
who ventured the journey to the villages.

Thompson, however, was not to be deterred; and he made his preparations
for the dash across the plains. As guide and interpreter, he engaged a
man who had resided for eight years among the Mandans, by name René
Jussomme. He also picked up a light-hearted Irishman, Hugh McCrachan,
who had often been to the villages for months at a time. The rest of the
party was made up of French Canadians, gay and gluttonous vagabonds, who
could nevertheless work as hard as they boasted, and hunt as much as
they ate. All these men enlisted for the expedition as free traders;
that is to say, each of them borrowed from McDonnell goods and trinkets
to the value of fifty beaver skins, which he undertook to repay on his
return. Thompson himself was supplied with two horses, and ammunition
and tobacco for trade. Jussomme had one horse; while the men each bought
two half-savage dogs from the Assiniboines. These were to haul their
sled-loads of goods across the plains.

Thus equipped, the party set forth on the 28th day of November. The dogs
were unaccustomed to hauling anything. Snapping and barking, they dashed
hither and thither in all directions, hardly restrained by the loud
*sacrés* of the Frenchmen, reinforced by lashes freely administered with
their stout rawhide whips. The motley procession crossed the Assiniboine
on the ice, and camped that evening in a wood by the side of the Souris
river, hardly six miles from the point from which they had set out.
Meanwhile, the temperature was falling. At eight that night Thompson
observed that it was 20° below zero. By the following morning it had
dropped seven degrees more, and a stinging west wind had sprung up which
kept them in camp. Here they remained for five days, in a temperature
that sank as low as 40° below zero; while the high wind whistled through
their canvas, and filled the tent with smoke from their fire. During
this time, they devoured the flesh of three bison which the Frenchmen
had brought into camp, while the dogs rejoiced in the offal.

The wind had by this time shifted to the north-west, and the weather
turned milder with snow. When the storm was over, they renewed their
journey, keeping close to the river in order that they might not lose
sight of the familiar landmarks, for the men neither knew the compass
nor would trust it to guide them. After making eleven miles, they came
to a grove of hardwood, in which they found five tents of Assiniboine
Indians. These gave them a hospitable welcome, but warned them that the
Sioux were on the warpath. Nevertheless, they pressed forward, and by
the following morning had reached the point where the trail led away
from the river across the wind-swept plain to Turtle Mountain on the
international frontier.

Jussomme now announced that they must prepare for an early start, as
they faced a long journey across country before they could reach the
shelter of the wooded heights. At seven the following morning they were
on their way. Mile after mile they trudged over the boundless plain
until one o'clock in the afternoon, and still no Turtle hill was in
sight. The weather had now turned threatening, and anxiety was in every
face. At this point Jussomme threw up his hands and confessed that he
had lost his way.

It was a critical moment. Springing to his horse, Thompson galloped to
the nearest knoll, from which with his glass he scanned the horizon on
every side. Not a vestige of wood was in sight, but far to the
north-west his eye caught what seemed to be the tops of a clump of
trees. On this he took a bearing with his compass, and called to the
party to follow him, which after some hesitation they made up their
minds to do. Meanwhile the wind came on with increasing force, and the
darkness closed in before they could see whether it was really a wood to
which their painful and tedious march led. However, they kept in file
and close together, and the dogs gave no trouble. It was black night
before they finally reached the wood. Utterly wearied, the men hurriedly
threw up their canvas and sought shelter from the storm.

The blizzard continued through the next day, and the men were too
exhausted to proceed. They remained in camp with nothing but the meat of
two tough old bulls to relieve their hunger. The day following two of
the three horses went lame, their hoofs eaten away by the hard crusty
snow. Luckily they encountered a small party of Assiniboines on their
way to McDonnell's house to trade, and were able to send the horses back
with them to the fort, purchasing dogs from the Indians in their stead.
Two days later they met another party of Indians, and from them got a
good meal. These Indians warned them that the Sioux were in waiting at
the Dog Tent Hills; and no offer would induce anyone of them to go
forward with the party as a guide.

They were now in the neighbourhood of Turtle Mountain, and Thompson had
taken sole command. Another gale, another blizzard, and another march
till nightfall brought them to the hill. On this occasion again the
compass proved a trusty guide. In the darkness, Thompson's face brushed
against the overhanging branch of a tree, and he knew that he had guided
his men safely to the wood. Thus they continued as far as the Dog Tent
Hills, near the elbow of the Souris. On approaching the broken country,
Thompson espied a long line of horsemen descending the slope and moving
off to the south. It was the Sioux, who had made up their minds that no
traveller would venture forth in such tempestuous weather. Thompson
signalled his men to throw themselves flat on the ground. This they did,
and remained unperceived until the enemy was out of sight. They then
entered the hills, and while they rested and hunted, cut tent poles and
firewood for the dash across the barren plain. The fifty miles that
still divided them from the waters of the Missouri were passed without
adventure, and they arrived, tired but triumphant, at the upper village
of the Mandans after a journey of thirty-three days.

Thompson was now introduced by Jussomme to a chief who bore the name of
"Big White Man." To this chief he explained that his business was not to
trade, but to visit the various tribes of natives, in order to see how
they could be more regularly supplied with arms, ammunition, and other
articles which they much needed. Surprised and pleased at this agreeable
information, the chief led the white man to his own hut, where he and
his servant Boisseau were comfortably installed and entertained with all
the rites of native hospitality.

In company with Jussomme and McCrachan, Thompson then paid a visit to
each of the five villages in turn. These, he found, were all built alike
of domelike huts constructed of mud plastered over a framework of wood,
each with an aperture in the centre of the roof to carry off the smoke
of the fire and admit light to the solitary chamber of the dwelling. In
front of each house stood a porch made of stretched bison skins,
affording an approach to a doorway large enough to admit a horse.
Passing the door, one entered a circular chamber about forty feet
across, and, from the earthen floor to the aperture in the roof,
eighteen or twenty feet in height. To the left of the doorway, sat the
master of the house on a couch covered with buffalo robes. Before him
was the fire, built in a circular space hollowed out of the floor, and
surrounded by vessels of native pottery containing maize and boiled
meat, the food of the household. Around the walls were a series of frame
bunks about three feet from the ground, each of them enclosed by hides
except for the front and made comfortable by a soft buffalo robe. To the
right of the entrance were the stalls for the two or three horses which
belonged to the household, to which every evening they were led back
after pasturing on the plains. In the smallest of these villages,
Thompson counted thirty-one such huts, in the largest one
hundred-and-thirteen, each hut containing a family of from eight to ten
souls.

Surrounded as they were by fierce and violent enemies, the Mandans had
constructed their villages with an eye to defence rather than to
comfort. For this purpose a site was selected on elevated ground, so
that no attack could be made from above. The houses were then built
irregularly without regard for streets, and the whole village surrounded
by a stockade of timbers at least twelve feet in height. On more than
one occasion, Thompson learned, the Sioux had taken advantage of a dark
and stormy night to approach the villages and fire the palisades. But
the flames had no power to destroy the earthen houses; there were no
straight streets down which the enemy could shoot; and, as a regular
siege was beyond the power of any of their foes, the Mandans had
hitherto escaped destruction.

The tribe, when Thompson visited them, were already acquainted with the
use of iron. Their flint-tipped spears and arrows they gladly laid
aside, when they could, for a long spear, headed with a flat iron
bayonet nine or ten inches in length. Thus far, however, they had been
visited only irregularly by traders; and so had but few guns among them.
Iron was so precious for purposes of war that it had not yet come into
common use for agriculture. Their ploughs were made of the shoulder
blade of a deer or bison, neatly fastened by thongs to a handle. For
hoes, they used pointed sticks hardened in the fire. A council of old
men allotted to each family its portion of ground in the rich alluvial
of the river bottom. From this they were able with their rude implements
to raise a sufficient quantity of the maize, pumpkins, beans, and melons
which were native to America.

Thompson was anxious to find out the origin of this interesting people,
for they had not been many years on the banks of the Missouri. Their
traditions, however, went back no further than the days of their
great-great-grandfathers. These, they said, had dwelt to the eastward,
possessing the rich flats about the upper waters of the Red river and
the Mississippi. There the wild rice grew in abundance and the deer were
in plenty, though the horse and the buffalo were unknown. On all these
streams they had villages and cultivated the ground as at present from
before the memory of man.

The Sioux to the south of their ancient home were their enemies, but,
armed only with stone-headed spears and arrows, could do them little
harm. To the north-east, in the depths of the gloomy forest, dwelt the
Chippewas, who were likewise powerless to hurt them. But the day came
when the Chippewas, armed by the white traders with guns, ironheaded
arrows, and spears, silently collected under cover of the forest, and
sallied out to harry their villages with fire, and cut off their men as
they were scattered in hunting parties far and wide. Hard pressed by the
attacks of an enemy whom they could not resist, they gave way from point
to point until they arrived at the banks of the Missouri; and thus put
the width of the great plains between them and their implacable foes.

Having made friends with the natives and taken the observations
necessary to determine the position of their villages, Thompson prepared
to depart. As the Mandans dwelt in the territory of the United States,
and it was contrary to the treaty of 1794 for a British company to plant
trading posts among them, commerce was possible only if they were
willing to make the journey to McDonnell's house to trade. Accordingly a
chief in the prime of life, together with four young warriors, was
selected to accompany Thompson on the trip home. These were joined by an
old man and his squaw, who said that they wished to see the houses of
the white men before they died. But the heights of the Missouri were too
much for the aged couple, and they dropped out. Fourteen days of storm
and tempest on the open plain sufficed to kill the spirit of two of the
warriors, and they also dropped out. With the remainder, Thompson
arrived at Assiniboine House on the 3rd of February, 1798.
Unfortunately, the attempt to open up trade with the Mandans turned out
to be unsuccessful. The journey was long and difficult in winter; and,
in summer, the Sioux were active and cut off parties who tried to make
the passage across their land so that the Mandan villages proved to be
beyond the reach of the merchants from Canada.

At McDonnell's house, Thompson prepared the maps and notes of his survey
to be sent by the next convoy to headquarters at Grand Portage. He then
took leave of his hospitable friend, and set forth on his explorations
up the Red river. With three French Canadians and an Indian guide, he
started down the Assiniboine, hauling his baggage and provisions by dog
sleds on the ice. The tedious windings of the stream and the ever
increasing depth of snow made progress difficult. Nevertheless, by the
7th of March he had reached the junction of the Assiniboine and the Red
rivers, where the city of Winnipeg now stands. He then turned up the Red
river, and in six days' travel came to the international boundary,
beyond which it was his duty to warn all traders that they were
trespassing in the territory of the United States.

By the 25th of March he had worked his way south as far as the post of
Baptiste Cadotte, which was situated on a tributary of the Red river,
near the present site of the town of Red Lake Falls. From this point he
purposed to cross the height of land to the western end of Lake
Superior. Could he do it before the break-up of winter, and while the
mantle of snow still lay on the ground to give passage to his dogs? He
had, it will be remembered, no experience of southern latitudes. His
last winter had been spent by the shore of Reindeer lake, where the ice
stood firm till a windstorm broke it up on the fifth day of July.
Cadotte warned him that the season was too far advanced; but he took the
risk.

On the 27th of March he began his his journey eastward up the Clearwater
river into Minnesota, picking up a guide from some Chippewas whom he
found on the way. As the day wore on, the rays of the sun increased in
power, and walking became difficult in the thawing snow. The night was
mild, and the following morning the guide took care to break his
snow-shoes that he might have an excuse for returning to camp. The day
was wasted, while Thompson waited impatiently for another guide to be
sent to take the place of the first. At sundown a storm came on with
thunder, lightning, and rain, which continued the night through and far
into the next day. The snow was now so heavy that progress was
impossible. The continuous rains had soaked the clothes and the baggage
of the party through and through. The fourth day opened with gusts of
hail and sleet. The country before them was like a lake, and Thompson
was compelled to admit himself beaten. Splashing and stumbling through
the bush and along the treacherous ice of the river, the party struggled
to make their way back to the protecting shelter of Cadotte's roof. But
their baggage was too much for them, and they had to give in. Finally
Thompson with one man, travelling light, pressed forward to the post for
help; and by the afternoon of the second day the weary travellers were
brought safely into camp.

When the rivers were finally clear of ice, Thompson, with his three
Canadians and a native woman, made a fresh start, this time by canoe and
with dried provisions to last for twelve days. They had first to battle
their way against the current of Clearwater river, to the portage which
brought them to Red lake. The country was everywhere soaked with water,
so that at night they were forced to cut down trees and sleep on the
branches. Red lake, they found, was still covered with patches of broken
ice. Hauling and paddling their canoe in turn they crossed the lake, and
entered an immense area of pond and marsh to the south. Everywhere
stretched beds of wild rice, the haunt of innumerable geese, duck, and
loon. With infinite toil they made their way from lake to lake and brook
to brook, until after five days in the marsh they arrived at Turtle
lake.

This lake Thompson took to be the true source of the Mississippi. Twenty
years later American surveyors reached the conclusion that, of all the
ponds whose waters join to form the Mississippi, Lake Itaska most
deserved the name. Lake Itaska lies a few miles to the south and west of
Turtle lake. Yet this fact hardly suffices to rob David Thompson of the
glory of being the first man to fix the point from which the Father of
Waters takes its rise.

There was still a long journey ahead to the coast of Lake Superior; and
the canoe was leaky from bumping about among the ice floes. Luckily two
boats of Chippewas came along on their way to John Sayer's post at Red
Cedar or Cass lake. With these Thompson and his party embarked. A carry
of two hundred yards took them past the narrow and shallow waters of
Turtle brook, to a point where the stream was enlarged by a tributary
from a nearby lake. Here they launched their canoes and followed the
stream through its incredible windings to the lake. This was the country
of wild rice and maple sugar, and on these the poor Indians were
compelled to subsist. Not a deer or a beaver was to be seen; all had
been destroyed. The geese and ducks flew overhead in safety; for the
impoverished natives could not even afford the price of guns and
ammunition, and they had lost the art of making and using the bow.

Sayer supplied Thompson with a fresh canoe, which enabled him to
continue his voyage. From the south of the lake, the valley of the
Mississippi now lay clear before him to the south east--a wide expanse
of marshy ground through which the channel meandered like a writhing
snake. As he advanced, however, the marsh gave way to a sandy loam,
heavily clothed with resinous fir. Arriving at Sand Lake river, he
turned east along this to Sand lake. Before him was a great swamp,
nearly five miles in width and stretching north and south as far as the
eye could reach. This was the last barrier between him and the
headwaters of the River St. Louis. Shouldering their canoe and baggage,
they advanced along the rude corduroy road which the traders had laid
across the bog. As often as they missed their step, they sank to their
waists in the mire. A long day's work was needed before they had reached
the other side. From thence a brook carried them to the main stream of
River St. Louis. They passed into the forest country that surrounds the
lake; and were soon at the trading house which the North-Westers
maintained at Fond du Lac on the present site of the city of Duluth.

Here they found an old twenty-eight foot canoe, which they patched up
and fitted with oars, for their slight river craft was unequal to the
winds and waves of Superior; and they had still to make a survey of the
lake. The weather was fine; and they made the circuit without adventure,
east along the south shore to Sault Ste. Marie, and westward along the
north shore to Grand Portage. Late in the evening of the 7th of June,
Thompson set foot on the pier, his long journey over.

At Sault Ste. Marie he had encountered Sir Alexander Mackenzie and
William McGillivray travelling east to Montreal. When they heard what he
had done, they were warm in their praise, and told him that he had
accomplished as much in ten months as might have been expected in two
years. His reputation was thus established, and his future with the
North West Company was assured.

CHAPTER V

EIGHT YEARS OF TRADING

The report which Thompson made to his employers after his return to
Grand Portage was of immense value to them. They now had a clear idea of
the whole stretch of country from Sault Ste. Marie to the upper waters
of the Missouri river, and were in a position to rearrange their trading
houses to meet the needs of the time. Similar work remained to be done
in the other regions to which the interests of the Company extended. But
the same haste was not required, and the surveys could be pushed forward
with less difficulty and expense in connection with what was the main
object of the partners, that is the prosecution of the trade in furs.
Thompson was therefore requested to undertake some of the actual work of
trading, with freedom to make such journeys of exploration as he saw
fit.

The eight years following therefore mark a new period in his service
with the North West Company, during which his activities carried him far
and wide along the great waterways of the interior. Throughout these
years he exercised, to the full, the qualities of mind and character
which made him such a unique surveyor. His bulky note books were crammed
with memoranda gathered with painstaking accuracy and checked with
minute care. From time to time, where a less hurried visit to one of the
more comfortable trading houses made it possible, he added his newly
acquired information to the map which he had in hand. With each report
that he made to Headquarters, the picture of the Great West gradually
took shape. Its physical features were delineated; its wild life was
noted and classified; its native populations, their numbers, their
racial affinities and languages, their manners and customs were as far
as possible described. This was indeed wizardry, as his ignorant
French-Canadian and Indian followers imagined; but it was the wizardry
of science, which, by the slow accumulation of ascertained facts, lays
the whole world of nature at the feet of civilized man.

In the summer of 1798, the attention of traders was largely directed to
the western forest country, which lies beyond the divide separating the
waters of the upper Saskatchewan from the basin of the Peace and
Athabaska rivers. Twenty years before, Peter Pond had penetrated into
this region as far as Lake Athabaska, and there established a post. At
Lake Athabaska, ten years later, Roderick Mackenzie had built Fort
Chippewyan, from which Sir Alexander had set out on his two famous
voyages, the one down the Mackenzie to the Arctic, the other up the
Peace to its headwaters and from thence across British Columbia to the
Pacific. Apart, however, from the activity centred in Lake Athabaska,
little had been done as yet to explore the possibilities of trade in
what is now northern Alberta.

Thompson was therefore instructed to proceed to Lake la Biche or Red
Deer lake, whose waters fall into the Athabaska river about fifty miles
below Athabaska Landing. On the 14th of July, he set forth from Grand
Portage with the Churchill river brigade. By the middle of August they
had reached Cumberland House, and a week later they had crossed over
Frog Portage to the main stream of the Churchill.

From this point west the route lay through a region as yet new to
Thompson. As he ascended the river to Isle à la Crosse, he found that
the country was still composed of the denuded rock with which he was
familiar on the lower stretches of the river. Ridges of this rock,
crossing the valley of the stream from point to point, gave it the
character of an irregular chain of lakes with many portages and falls.
Like the rest of the stony country, it was somewhat poor in game and
fur-bearing animals, although many of the lakes teemed with fish.

From Isle à la Crosse to the valley of the Athabaska there were two
possible routes. To the north there was Turnor's old course by way of
Methy Portage and Clearwater river. To the south, the Beaver river led
through a district of plain and forest to its headwaters at Beaver lake,
from which there was an easy portage over the height of land to Lake la
Biche. Thompson followed the Beaver river, and arrived at Lake la Biche
in time to build a post before the beginning of winter.

He was now at the southern end of that vast stretch of country which he
calls the Great Western Forest, and almost in the same latitude as that
of Reed lake in the Muskrat country where he had spent the winter of
1794-5. He was thus in a position to compare the climate and soil of
this region with that of his old home on the eastern or "Siberian" side
of North America. Throughout the long winter months, he kept as usual a
careful record of the temperatures registered from day to day by his
thermometer. At Reed lake, the temperature for December had varied from
+31° to -45° with a mean of -10° F. For January it had varied from +11°
to -47° with a mean of -21.3°, and for February from +39° to -31° with a
mean of +6°. At Lake la Biche he found that although in each of the
three winter months, the mercury sank as low as 48° below zero, it rose
at times as high as 43° above, and that the mean for December, the
coldest month, was not lower than -6.5°. Then, too, while Reed lake was
hardly above the level of Hudson Bay, the country about Lake la Biche
was high and dry, and the snow did not lie so thick on the ground at the
end of winter. Accordingly, the rays of the sun had a chance to exert
their power on the face of the land much earlier in the year, and spring
burst at Lake la Biche long before winter had loosened his iron grip on
the region about Reed lake.

The forests with their wild life responded generously to the less
rigorous climate. In the Muskrat region, the wretched traders and
Indians were forced to scour the country for fish and game in quantities
sufficient to keep them alive. At Lake la Biche the waters yielded an
abundant supply of fish; and during the five months that he spent at the
post, Thompson saw no less than forty-nine moose and several buffalo
brought in, all of which had been shot within twenty miles of the house.
There also all the animals, including the precious beaver, attained
their full size and development.

Thompson wished to get an idea of the extent and general character of
this western forest land, and the quickest way to do so was to survey
the Athabaskan waters from their sources. Accordingly, when spring
opened, he rode across country southwest to Fort Augustus and from
thence westward to the headwaters of the Pembina, which at this point
was divided from the valley of the Saskatchewan by a narrow neck of
land. Embarking on the Pembina, he followed it down till it merged with
the main stream of the Athabaska river. A short excursion up the Slave
Lake river enabled him to explore the shore line of Lesser Slave lake.
Returning to the Athabaska, he continued along its broad stream past
Athabaska Landing to the mouth of the Clearwater river, and from thence
he made his way along the well-known track by Methy Portage and the
Churchill to Grand Portage. Throughout the region embraced in his
survey, he found little exposed rock and therefore few lakes, but what
was better for the beaver many small brooks and streams which they could
dam for their ponds. The country thus promised a steady yield of furs
from year to year, and this, with the generous supply of game which the
forest offered to trader and trapper, was enough to justify the name
which it bore, "The fur-traders' paradise."

In the mad competition for pelts, the different companies could not rest
content with the trade of regions already within their grasp. Each of
them sought always to push further afield; for he, who could anticipate
his rivals in opening new country, might plant his trading houses on the
most advantageous sites and bind the Indians to himself with ties which
later comers could not break. In 1790, Peter Pangman for the
North-Westers had pressed along the course of the North Saskatchewan to
a point five miles above its junction with the Clearwater. There from a
hill top he had gazed along the line of snow-capped Rockies, and his
eyes had travelled up the winding course of the river to the gap through
which it issued from the mountains. From that time the partners had
never ceased to dream of the wealth that lay beyond the Great Divide. In
a decade the line of their trading posts had been extended to a point
but three miles short of "Pangman's Pine." There, in a wide plain not
far from the forks of the river, rose the walls and blockhouses of Rocky
Mountain House, destined to serve as a point of departure for the
invasion of the last great area as yet unknown.

But much tedious work remained to be done before it would be possible to
hazard the passage of the Rocky Mountains. Besides the North
Saskatchewan, there were two main branches of the South river, the Red
Deer and the Bow rivers, and these had to be surveyed to their sources
in the foothills in order to determine the best routes for trade. The
Blackfoot, Blood, and Piegan Indians, whose encampments lay along the
courses of these streams, were suspicious and hostile. They held these
regions by right of conquest from the Kootenays and Snakes whom they had
driven to the mountains; and these needed only to procure the muskets
and ammunition which the white men could supply in order to sweep down
through the rugged passes and revenge themselves for the defeats of many
years. The Indians therefore steadily opposed any movement of the
traders toward the Rockies, and even the stoutly fortified trading posts
were hardly secure against a sudden assault.

In these circumstances, the partners at Grand Portage could think of no
one better qualified than David Thompson to accomplish the objects of
the company. They remembered the early connections which he had made
among the Piegans during his service with the English, and they had
complete confidence in his skill and daring. Thompson was accordingly
taken away from his work in the Athabaska country, almost before it was
well begun, and despatched up the Saskatchewan to Fort George, in order
that he might draw the maps of his recent surveys and complete his
preparations for the work that was now in hand.

In the spring he took horse and rode overland to Fort Augustus, and
thence south along the Edmonton-Calgary line to a point just short of
the present town of Lacombe. Turning west, he struck the Clearwater near
its mouth and found himself at Rocky Mountain House. While he himself
descended the North Saskatchewan to the elbow, making a survey as he
went, he sent four French Canadians south to the Red Deer river, with
orders to follow it to its junction with the main stream of the South
Saskatchewan. A short distance below Rocky Mountain House, he found a
party of Hudson's Bay men encamped for building. The English, as well as
the Canadians, were bent on crossing the Great Divide; and it would be a
serious blow if they were allowed to anticipate the North-Westers in so
doing.

Accordingly, on his return to Rocky Mountain House, Thompson brought
with him Duncan McGillivray from down the river, in order that he might
have assistance in pressing forward his explorations. Along with
McGillivray, he rode across to the Red Deer river, where he found a camp
of Piegans. A short stay among them was enough to lull their suspicions;
and Thompson was then able to ride twenty-two miles west to the foot of
the mountains, where he expected to meet a band of Kootenays. These he
found, twenty-six strong. With their women and children they had crossed
the divide to meet the white traders. These Kootenays were the first of
the British Columbia Indians whom Thompson had encountered. He warned
them of the presence of the Piegans only a few miles east, and sent them
back across the mountains. In order to avoid the Piegans, they travelled
by way of the North Saskatchewan and succeeded in reaching their homes
unobserved.

Meanwhile, with McGillivray and four men on horseback, Thompson crossed
the Red Deer river and rode still further south to the banks of the Bow,
not far from Calgary. This stream he surveyed as far east as the bend
and westward to Exshaw at the foot of the mountains. McGillivray then
made a traverse across from the north fork of the Saskatchewan to the
valley of the Athabaska, the results of which were carefully
incorporated in Thompson's notes. Thompson himself spent the rest of the
winter at Rocky Mountain House, trading with the natives and taking
observations to fix the location of the post.

When spring opened, he resolved to attempt a journey into the mountains
by land. With a party of eight men and an Indian guide, he started
westward from Rocky Mountain House. In the narrow valley of the Sheep
river, the horses could go no further; and as the guide knew of no other
route, they returned to the post. A second attempt, this time by canoe
up the Saskatchewan, was equally unsuccessful because of the floods on
the river. When Thompson returned to eastern headquarters in the spring
of 1802, he was not yet able to report that he had opened a practicable
route to the west of the Rockies.

What was the effect of this news upon the minds of the partners? From
Thompson's subsequent movements, it is possible to surmise. The attempt
to pierce the mountains from the headwaters of the Saskatchewan was for
the time being abandoned, and attention was once more transferred to the
north. According to the surveys already made by Thompson, the west end
of Lesser Slave lake could not be more than fifty or seventy-five miles
from the valley of the Peace river, up which Alexander Mackenzie had
travelled ten years before. Thither Thompson was sent, with instructions
to explore a route across the watershed.

From the upper end of Lesser Slave lake, he pushed his way west through
a wide valley until he came to the banks of the Smoky river. On the
different branches of the Saskatchewan, he had noted the seams of coal
exposed along the banks. At Smoky river, the coal beds, ignited by
spontaneous combustion, had been burning from beyond the memory of the
oldest Indians on the river, and the dark clouds of smoke which they
sent forth gave the river its name. Smoky river was a tributary of the
Peace. A short journey down stream brought him to the Forks where now
stands Peace River Landing.

Thompson spent the winters of 1803 and 1804 developing trade from the
old posts built by Mackenzie at the Forks of the river, and westward
beyond the frontiers of British Columbia. Here, as at the headwaters of
the Saskatchewan, he found rivals. No sooner was he settled at the Forks
than a party of XY traders from Montreal landed a few yards from the
post and made preparations for the erection of a house. Thompson
prosecuted his work with his accustomed vigour. In the winter of 1805,
when Simon Fraser set forth on the journey that was to make him famous,
he found that a base for his exploration of the Fraser river had been
soundly established on the Peace by his friend and colleague David
Thompson. He honoured him accordingly when he gave the name of Thompson
to the greatest tributary of the Fraser river.

By the summer of 1804 Thompson was once more back at headquarters, no
longer at Grand Portage (for that had been surrendered to the
Americans), but at Fort William on Thunder Bay, where the dépôt of the
company had now been established. In that year, the trade war with the
XY Company had reached an acute stage. The Hudson's Bay Company had also
reorganized their enterprises, and between them these rivals had almost
succeeded in wresting from the North-Westers the trade of the Muskrat
country. Thompson was therefore withdrawn from the fields of his recent
activity, his chance of crossing the mountains was indefinitely
postponed, and he was sent into the Muskrat country to restore the trade
of that region to the Canadians.

With a heavy heart he turned his back on the far west, and entered the
cold and dismal forest which he knew only to loathe. But loyalty was one
of the deepest instincts of his nature, and so, with indefatigable
energy, he proceeded to build new posts and explore new routes in the
region north-east of Lake Winnipeg. In the course of his efforts, he
carried the flag of the North-Westers to a point on South Indian lake
not more than two hundred and fifty miles distant from Churchill itself.
In his relations with rival traders, he exhibited a friendliness and
courtesy that stands in marked contrast with the cut-throat methods too
frequently adopted at critical moments of competition. The surveys begun
years before, when he was working under Joseph Colen, were now
triumphantly finished. Of them, a member of the Canadian Geological
Survey says, "After Thompson had completed his surveys of this muskrat
country, no further information was obtained about it for nearly a
century, and when in 1896, I travelled through it, the only map of any
service which was available was that drawn by David Thompson in 1813
from surveys made at this time."

It is sometimes imagined that the Indians a century ago existed in vast
numbers; and that they were universally of a warlike and bloodthirsty
disposition. This is a complete mistake. It was only in especially
favourable localities that conditions were such as to promote the
evolution of large bands, and generally speaking the Indian was a poor
and humble creature. Lacking the power of invention, he was often
satisfied to make use of utensils of the most primitive character, and
he was almost, if not quite, unarmed.

Throughout the whole of the Muskrat country Thompson was able to count
but ninety-two widely scattered families, each of them numbering perhaps
seven souls. This gave to every human being from two to three hundred
square miles of hunting country. Yet so poor was the region and so great
the improvidence of its inhabitants that, in unfavourable seasons, the
population was often reduced to the verge of starvation, and it was only
by means of the greatest efforts that they wrested a livelihood from
their gloomy land of rock and forest.

All of Thompson's efforts therefore did not avail to bring satisfactory
returns from a region so poor in furs, and inhabited by such a sparse
and wretched population. It was with joy in his heart that he handed
over the district to a partner in the early summer of 1806, and once
more wended his way back to Fort William.

Two events of personal interest in the life of Thompson occurred during
these eight years. The first was his marriage to Charlotte Small, the
half-breed daughter of Patrick Small, an early trader in the West. Small
was a member of a famous Irish family, which had given generals and
admirals to the service of the Empire. He had, however, followed the
custom of the country and taken a native woman to wife. Thompson's
marriage took place at Isle à la Crosse in the summer of 1799. The other
event took place on November 8, 1804, although the news of it did not
reach Thompson until some time later. On that date the North West
Company and the XY Company agreed to cease their ruinous competition and
join forces for the expansion of their trade. In the terms of agreement,
the name of David Thompson appears as a partner of the United Company.
This was good news in itself; but better still was the prospect that
loomed up before his eyes. With the wounds of competition healed, and
the Canadian trading interests now presenting a united front, the last
obstacle to an aggressive forward movement was removed, and the conquest
of the Rockies might finally be achieved.

CHAPTER VI

ACROSS THE GREAT DIVIDE

There are long stretches in human life when the contest with fate seems
endless and the result uncertain, but it is such periods that test the
mettle of a man. In the life of David Thompson, the eight years just
past had been marked by no striking achievement. Yet with unflagging
patience and zeal he had discharged his routine duties, constantly
adding to his equipment the knowledge and judgment that come from
maturer years and wider experience. When therefore his hour at last
struck, he was not unready. Expert surveyor, skilled trader, he was now
to crown his life-work by a piece of original discovery and exploration
on a scale grand enough to place him in the foremost rank among the
builders of British North America.

It was summer of the year 1806 when Thompson returned from the Muskrat
country to headquarters at Fort William. There he found a new excitement
and a new enthusiasm in the air. During the preceding year the American
officers, Lewis and Clark, had crossed from the upper Missouri to the
valley of the Snake river, and followed that stream to its junction with
the lower Columbia, down which they had made their way to the Pacific
ocean. John Jacob Astor, the great American merchant, was exerting all
his strength to build up a fur trading empire on the Pacific slope under
the flag of the Republic; and the full extent of his ambitions was now
disclosed. For some years the Hudson's Bay Company had been knocking at
the barrier of the Rockies, and, spurred by competition, they might at
any moment burst through. Fraser for the North-Westers had already
advanced from the Forks of the Peace, and accomplished the difficult and
dangerous feat of descending the Fraser river. But between the Fraser
river on the north and the Snake on the south was a vast region on which
the feet of white men had never trod; and the North West Company, no
longer crippled by their civil war with the XY traders, were resolved to
claim this region for themselves. Thompson was at once despatched to
Rocky Mountain House, with definite instructions to cross the mountains,
this time as senior officer at the post and in full charge of the
operations.

The winter of 1806-7 was spent in preparation; and John McDonald of
Garth, trader of the Company, together with Quesnel and Finan McDonald,
clerks, lent a hand in the work. The route selected was by way of the
North Saskatchewan, which Thompson knew must be practicable, because it
was along this road that the Kootenay Indians had returned, when he sent
them back to their homes some years before. He therefore despatched one
of his men, a half-breed called Jaco Finlay, up this road into the
mountains, with instructions to spy out the land. Everything was done
with the utmost quietness. The Piegan Indians suspected nothing,
although they were at all times visiting the fort. Even the Hudson's Bay
people, encamped on the river just below the North-Westers, had not an
inkling of Thompson's plans.

In the spring Jaco Finlay returned to the post with his report. He had
penetrated through the gap in the mountains to a large valley near the
head of the river, where he had built a small outpost and got in touch
with the Kootenays. From this valley he had crossed the watershed to a
small stream which flowed south-westward and emptied into a mighty
river. At the mouth of this stream he had built a canoe, which he had
carefully "cached" for Thompson's use.

At this moment an incident occurred in distant Montana, which, tragic in
itself, was not without advantage for Thompson. Captain Lewis, the
American officer, had became embroiled with the Blackfeet. They attacked
his camp and two of their warriors were killed. Suddenly all the allied
tribes were inflamed with the passion for revenge. War parties gathered
throughout the plains, and the Piegans in the neighborhood of Rocky
Mountain House were drawn off to the south. Perceiving the passes
unguarded, Thompson gathered his equipment and made an immediate start.
With his wife and children, Finan McDonald and a party of half-breeds to
help him, he moved up the river by horse and canoe and entered the
mountains.

As he advanced, the country became rougher and wilder. The grassy hills
were left behind, and the mountains raised their heads in mad confusion
height on height, bald and precipitous masses of solid rock, except for
the patches of pinewood that clung here and there to their slopes. At
times, the crags came together compressing the river to the width of a
few yards, through which the current rushed against them. Again, when
the valley widened, the stream would divide into many channels dotted
with rugged islets and marked by shoals of rock and sand. Finally they
reached the valley in which Jaco Finlay had built his house--a low and
level plain to the north side of the river, about five miles long and
not less than a mile in width. On every hand were to be seen the remains
of old tepees erected by the Kootenays, who frequented the spot to make
dried provisions from the buffalo and mountain goat. For this reason
Thompson gave the valley the name of Kootenay plains.

Above Kootenay plains, the river contracted to a width of barely fifteen
yards, and so continued to the forks, at which point the canoes had to
be laid up. From the forks, there was a splendid view of the mountains
still ahead, their peaks more elevated and craggy than they had so far
seen, for they were in fact the main range of the Rockies. Taking the
left branch of the stream they followed it to within a mile of its end
in Glacier lake. At this point, between Mount Balfour on the right and
Mount Forbes on the left, was a gap opening to the west. Into this gap
they turned. A march of two miles through heavy pinewood brought them to
a rivulet whose waters flowed to the west. "May God in his mercy," says
the pious explorer, "give me to see where its waters flow into the ocean
and return in safety." Thus he marked out his programme for the next
four years.

This rivulet (Blaeberry creek) descended sharply through a narrow,
winding valley between the heights; and it was necessary for the party
to force their way through the thick woods along the steep and rugged
slopes, and to cross and recross the stream through water knee-deep, in
order to reach the mouth. A full day's travel, however, brought them to
the valley of the Columbia. The weather had done its work on the canoe
built by Jaco Finlay; and it was quite unseaworthy. They had to halt
while they scoured the woods for materials and built new canoes. Finally
they embarked and paddled south up the Columbia until they came to its
headwaters. There, a short distance from Lake Windermere, they hewed
logs of heavy fir and built a cabin which they strongly stockaded on
three sides, the fourth resting on the steep bank of the river. This was
Old Kootenay House, the first trading post erected by white men on the
waters of the Columbia.

In this remote spot, the safety of all depended upon the courage and
resource of the leader. Additional supplies were needed from Rocky
Mountain House, and Finan McDonald was sent back across the mountains to
fetch them. Until the end of autumn, provisions were scarce, for the red
deer and antelope had not yet descended from the higher levels, and the
mountain goat was hard to shoot as he leapt from crag to crag. The party
therefore relied on fish and the flesh of wild horses whose feeding
grounds were not more than two miles from the house. For the purpose of
trade, it was necessary to get in touch with the natives and to examine
the country as well as possible. The season was late, but Thompson was
able to make one short excursion with a chief of the Flatbow Indians.

When Finan McDonald rejoined his chief, he brought with him alarming
intelligence. In the course of the summer, the brother of Old White
Swan, a Blackfoot chief, had with his band assaulted and pillaged Fort
Augustus, possessing himself of many guns, much ammunition and tobacco
and various other articles. Whether or not he had murdered the traders
at the Fort, McDonald could not say; but it was clear that the spirit of
unrest and resentment against the whites which had for some time
pervaded the whole Blackfeet confederacy was now coming to a head; and
Thompson could hardly hope that he himself would escape serious trouble.

Trouble came rather sooner than he expected. The fort was not yet
finished when twelve Piegan Indians appeared on foot from across the
mountains. A month later twenty-three more arrived. These set up their
tents along with the others just outside the gates. For over two months
they hung about the stockade, making themselves very objectionable, and
forcing the garrison to remain together within the walls. But Thompson
had a small stock of dried provisions on hand, and he put his men on
short rations, so that there might be no need to scatter over the
country for hunting. For water, he let down two large kettles nightly
from the steep river bank and this was enough for the daily needs of the
post. Towards the end of October, two of the Indians disappeared from
the group, and the garrison feared a general attack. Nothing, however,
materialized, and before winter set in, the savages drifted quietly
away.

Yet their peril was not yet over. One morning, two more Piegans
presented themselves at the fort. Thompson was anxious, but he did not
flinch. He showed them the strength of his stockades and bastions, the
walls bored with loopholes for his muskets. "I know," he said, "that you
are come as spies and intend to destroy us, but many of you will die
before you succeed. Go back to your countrymen and tell them this." At
the same time, he loaded them with presents of tobacco for their
friends. A fortunate circumstance hastened their departure. Two of the
Kootenay Indians came to the fort while they were there, and when they
saw the Piegans, they glared at them like tigers. Meanwhile the little
garrison watched and waited, six hardy voyageurs ready to die if
necessary in order to make good the words of their chief. And while they
waited, winter came on, covering the mountains with snow and placing
them in safety.

It was some time before Thompson learned the details of his escape. The
two Piegans were, as he guessed, the advanced guard of a large war party
that was being formed at the instigation of the civil chief to crush the
white men and the natives to the west side of the mountains before they
became well armed. The war chief (Thompson's old friend Kootanae Appee)
had opposed this venture. How, he urged, could they smoke to the Great
Spirit for success, if without warning they invaded the lands of a
people with whom for ten summers they had been at peace? Such, however,
was the influence of the wilder spirits, that the old war chief was
compelled to yield to their will.

In fifteen days about three hundred warriors under three chiefs
assembled at the rendezvous named by Kootanae Appee, and under his
leadership marched through the mountains to within twenty miles of the
post. There they awaited the return of their scouts. It was not long
before the latter arrived. The Kootenays, they said, were gathering
under the white man to fight for the protection of their post. At the
same time they presented the chiefs with Thompson's gifts, six feet of
tobacco for Kootenae Appee, eighteen inches for each of the lesser
chiefs, and a fine pipe of red porphyry with an ornamental stem in which
to smoke it.

Thompson's knowledge of the Indians was thorough, and in this case, his
guess as to their intentions had hit the mark. When the war chiefs heard
his message of defiance, they were dumbfounded. "What can we do with
this man," they exclaimed, "our women cannot mend a pair of shoes but he
sees them" (alluding, of course, to Thompson's astronomical
observations). Then the eldest of the three war chiefs, wistfully eyeing
the tobacco, of which they had none, observed: "I have attacked tents,
my knife could cut through them and our enemies had no defence against
us. I am ready to do so again. But to go and fight against logs of wood
that a ball cannot pierce, and with people we cannot see and with whom
we are at peace, is what I am averse to. I go no further!" So saying, he
slowly fitted the pipe to the stem and handed it to Kootenae Appee. Led
by Kootenae Appee, they all smoked; and, having accepted Thompson's
present, were unable to go further against him. Thus by his own resource
and by the support of an old friend won in the days of his service for
the Hudson's Bay Company, David Thompson prevented the destruction of
the first trading post on the Columbia.

With the coming of spring began the work of exploring the country.
Leaving McDonald in charge of Kootenay House, Thompson embarked with
four voyageurs on the 20th of April, 1807, and paddled through Lake
Windermere to the source of the Columbia. From thence, an easy portage
of two miles across a grassy plain brought him to a fine stream flowing
south, the Kootenay river of today. Launching his canoe, he proceeded to
search for Indians.

The river flowed swiftly along between high and steep banks of rock,
their slopes clothed with magnificent timber of all kinds. From time to
time the stream narrowed so that the travellers were forced to paddle
briskly in order to keep ahead of the current. As they approached
Kootenay Falls, in Lincoln county, Montana, the river entered a cañon no
less than a mile in length, terminating in a gorge where the trail left
the river side and meandered along the dizzy slope of steep bed rock,
three hundred feet above the level of the stream. An hour and a quarter
was necessary for the carry; and they cut their shoes to pieces. The
least slip would have meant sure destruction; and they struggled along
over the jagged rocks without a grain of earth or sand on them to
relieve their crippled feet. On the 14th of May, having followed the
winding course of the stream southward across the present international
boundary and northward again as far as Kootenay lake, they at length
came upon ten tepees of Indians.

During all this time, they had shot nothing except for a few antelope
and they were nearly famished. Once they came upon the carcase of an
antelope, on which an eagle was feeding. Chasing the bird, they seized
the meat, but it was tainted and made them all sick. The day following,
they encountered the Indians. These, however, had nothing to offer the
white men except a few dried carp and some bitter black bread, made of
the moss collected from the bark of the resinous fir and the larch.

The snows of the mountains were now melting, and the water of the river
had risen six feet, overflowing the wide meadows. Owing to the floods,
none of the Kootenays were willing to come to the house to trade. To
paddle home against the current was impossible. Thompson therefore laid
up his canoe, bought horses from the Indians and engaged a guide who
undertook to lead him overland by a well-known native trail northeast
along the valley of the Grand Quête river to Kootenay House.

A day's travel brought them to a large brook, so deep and rapid that the
horses could not cross. Thompson selected a large cedar growing by the
bank. This he felled so that it lay across the stream and served as a
bridge over which they carried their luggage. The horses were taken
separately, and by means of a heavy strap of rawhide, dragged kicking
and struggling to the further bank. The guide then went hunting, but
returned empty handed, and the party went supperless to bed. Early next
morning, he killed a small antelope, which was eagerly devoured. But the
faint-hearted guide had already had enough. Without warning, he decamped
and returned to his people, leaving the white men stranded among the
hills, without provisions and utterly ignorant of the country.

For two days they waited with faint hopes of his return. Thompson then
sent two of his men back to the tepees to ask for another guide. In the
presence of these men, Ugly Head, one of the chiefs, made a bitter
attack upon his followers. He reproached them for their lack of spirit,
contrasting their conduct with that of the white men who braved every
danger and hardship to bring them arms, ammunition and other things
which they needed. "How many of you," he said, "will volunteer to
accompany the strangers back to their home?" Not a man answered the
call. They knew too well the dangers of mountain travel at that season
of the year. In this crisis Ugly Head himself announced that he would
act as guide; and, with the voyageurs to lead him, made his way to
Thompson's camp.

The noble and manly conduct of the Indian inspired the little party with
great confidence and hope. Under his leadership, they made their way
among the rugged hills, avoiding the inundated meadows. The raging
torrents they passed by throwing bridges of trees across them. Finally
they reached the Kootenay river not far below the portage; and here,
after building a canoe to complete their journey, they took leave of
their guide. In a short time they were safe at Kootenay House.

Thompson had now to conduct the winter's hunt all the way east to Rainy
River House, and bring back supplies for the following year. Among these
supplies were two kegs of alcohol, which his partners insisted that he
should take with him. Thompson was well aware of the deplorable results
that had followed the introduction of spirits among the Indians, but he
was overruled. When he came to the defiles of the Saskatchewan, he
caused the two kegs to be loaded on the back of a vicious horse. By noon
the kegs were empty and broken to pieces. He wrote to his partners,
telling them what he had done, and vowing that so long as he was in
charge of the fur trade across the mountains, he would do the same with
every keg of alcohol which was sent to him. He was as good as his word;
and thus for a few years at least succeeded in keeping the curse of
spirits from the Indians of the Pacific slope.

When Thompson reached Kootenay House, the season was too far advanced to
allow of further exploration. He therefore sent Finan McDonald to open a
trading house at Kootenay Falls, while he himself remained for the
winter at the post, taking observations and trading with the Indians. In
the following spring, he had once more to cross the mountains with the
furs, but by midsummer he was back at his house ready to prosecute his
discoveries further to the south.

In the neighborhood of the Falls, Thompson had found that the Kootenay
river bent sharply to the west and north. In this direction, he had
traced its course to Kootenay lake, before the floods came on,
compelling him to cross overland to his home under the guidance of the
chief Ugly Head. To the south of the Kootenay was a ridge of mountainous
country, intersected however, by well-marked Indian trails running north
and south. These trails, he was told, led to another great river,
parallel with the Kootenay and, like it, flowing mainly to the west.
This river (now known as Clark's Fork) he made up his mind to explore.

His point of departure was from Ugly Head's encampment, near the present
site of Bonner's Ferry, Idaho. There he laid up his canoes, and borrowed
horses from the Kootenays for the journey across country. A two day's
ride brought him to Clark's Fork at the point where it expands to form
Lake Pend d'Oreille. Here he was met by a large deputation of Salish
Indians, who welcomed him with presents and gave him every assistance in
finding a site suitable for the erection of a post. Their joy was easy
to understand, for they were armed merely with a few rude lances and
flint-headed arrows, utterly useless in warfare against the Indians of
the plains. Thompson had guns, ammunition, and iron arrow-heads for
trade, but he warned them that in order to procure these advantages,
they must learn to be industrious in hunting for beaver and other furs,
and cease spending their days and nights in gambling--the pet vice of
the savage. This they eagerly promised to do.

It was the end of September before he had finished the construction of
his new post (Kullyspell House), and he followed it up, by constructing
a second post, Salish House, sixty miles further east along the river.
From Salish House, he had only to ride out to the great camp of the
Salish Indians near Flathead lake in order to secure the promise of
their trade. He was now thoroughly established along the whole course of
Clark's Fork river.

From information he had gathered, Thompson judged that both the Kootenay
river and Clark's Fork were tributaries of the Columbia, and that if he
followed them westward to their mouths he would strike that mighty
river. From the unwelcome visitations he had experienced at the hands of
the Piegans, he realized that the line of approach from the defiles of
the Saskatchewan to his new trading post was exposed throughout its
length to raids of the plainsmen through the easy passes of the
mountains. He therefore attempted to explore Clark's Fork to its
junction with the Columbia, hoping that from thence he might discover a
route further west and less accessible to his foes.

For some time he followed the course of the river westward through a
country of extensive meadows and forests, enriched by innumerable
streams of pure water, and already in March responding to the generous
rays of the sun, and the warm breezes from the ocean. But as he
approached the mouth, the appearance of the land was changed. Rude
blocks of basalt made the country difficult for horses; the stream,
tumbling in countless rapids and falls, was unnavigable for canoes. He
was forced to turn back; and as the winter's furs were waiting for his
arrival, he made his way to Kootenay House and thence, to the dépôt on
Rainy river.

In the course of the winter the Salish Indians had traded upwards of
twenty muskets and several hundreds of iron arrow-heads, and by dint of
constant practice had become so proficient in their use that they felt
themselves a match for the Indians of the plains. In the month of July,
when the bison bulls were getting fat, they formed a camp of not less
than 150 men to hunt and make dried provisions as Thompson had asked
them to do. With Finan McDonald, Michel Bourdeaux and Baptiste Buché to
help and encourage them, they crossed the mountains by an easy defile to
the east of Flathead lake, and boldly preceded to hunt for the buffalo.

It was not long before the Piegans got wind of their presence. One
morning, the scouts came riding into camp at breakneck speed with the
cry, "The enemy is upon us." Down went the tents, and tent poles and
baggage were quickly formed into a rude rampart. This was barely ready,
when the enemy's horsemen came dashing at the rampart with wild shouts
of rage. The Salish stood their ground; and neither a second nor a third
charge was able to shake them. The battle was now to be of infantry. The
Salish lay quietly behind their ramparts awaiting the assault; while all
day long the enemy advanced in parties of thirty or forty, shouting
insulting cries and doing their best to lure them from their cover. As
often as they came within gunshot, they were met with a fusilade of
bullets. At nightfall they retired discomfited, leaving the Salish in
possession of the field.

This was the first occasion on which the Salish had ventured to face the
Piegans in the open field, and although no scalps were taken on either
side, they counted it a victory to have stood their ground. As for the
Piegans, their hearts were full of bitterness; and they swore an oath to
wreak vengeance on the white men who had crossed the mountains to the
west, and furnished arms and ammunition to their age-long foes.

CHAPTER VII

THE RACE TO THE SEA

By the middle of October, 1810, Thompson was once more at the foot of
the Rockies en route for the Columbia with four canoe loads of supplies.
At Rainy River House, he had learned that a vessel chartered by J. J.
Astor and loaded with goods in charge of two former North West traders
was on her way around Cape Horn, bound for the Columbia; and his orders
were to anticipate this ship in reaching the mouth of the river. He was
therefore anxious to get through the passes without delay, and at all
costs to avoid a conflict with the Piegans.

Since the 24th of September the brigade had been held up in the
neighborhood of Rocky Mountain House. The post was thronged by noisy
bands of Piegan, Sarcee, Blood, and Fall Indians, who had come
ostensibly to trade, but really to head off any movement of the white
man toward the mountains. Alexander Henry, the trader in charge,
endeavoured to get rid of these unwelcome visitors, but all in vain. In
such a crisis, the time-honoured expedient was rum. While some of the
Indians were drunk, however, others were sober, and for some weeks it
was impossible to get the canoes away without observation, either by day
or night. Finally, however, Henry got the frightened voyageurs under
way, and by the 13th of October, the brigade was already within twenty
miles of the mountains.

Thompson himself with a partner, William Henry, and two Indian hunters
had ridden ahead to the gap, scouring the country for game and keeping a
sharp watch for possible enemies. The party had killed three red deer,
made a scaffold, and placed the meat on it for safety against wild
animals. Days passed, and the canoes did not put in an appearance. On
the 17th the oldest hunter, rising as usual very early in the morning,
looked at the scaffold and remarked, "I have had bad dreams; this meat
will never be eaten." So saying, he saddled his horse and rode away.

Thompson could no longer conceal his anxiety. He ordered Henry and the
other Indian to proceed down the river in search of the canoes; with
positive orders not to fire a shot except in self-defence. At eight in
the evening they returned, and he heard their story. Some miles down the
river, they had seen a number of Piegans encamped on the bank. A short
distance below this camp, they had descended the slope to the river,
where they found the marks of canoes and near them in the bottom a rude
rampart of stones on which there were traces of blood. Proceeding
further down stream, they had fired a shot as a signal to the lost
canoemen, but it was not returned.

Thoroughly alarmed by their rashness and folly, Thompson prepared to fly
for his life, for he knew that the Piegans would be on them in the
morning. At dawn of day, they took horse and made their way east by a
wide detour through the forest. Fallen trees and undergrowth interrupted
their progress, and their horses' hoofs made their track easy to follow.
Fortunately the afternoon brought with it a light fall of snow, giving
them some hope of shaking off their pursuers, and late in the evening
they ventured to halt and kindle a small fire.

Racked with fear for his own safety and anxiety for the fate of his men,
Thompson passed a sleepless night. His first care was to find the
brigade. Avoiding Rocky Mountain House, he continued east for sixty
miles along the river, and there, on the second afternoon, he came upon
his men, safe and sound, encamped in an abandoned trading-post known as
Boggy Hall.

All hope was now abandoned of passing in safety by the defiles of the
Saskatchewan, and Thompson determined to blaze a new trail across the
Rockies by way of the Athabaska river. The route projected lay over an
old path of the Assiniboine Indians to a point on the Athabaska not far
from the present line of the Canadian National Railways; and from thence
along the valley of the river past the mouth of Yellowhead Pass to its
headwaters some miles further south. From this point a pass led across
the height of land to the Wood river, a small tributary of the Columbia.
In later years this pass (known as the Athabaska Pass) was the regular
route for traders of the Hudson's Bay Company on their journeys to
British Columbia.

Horses and dogs were rapidly collected for the trip over land. The men
were detailed to their several duties, four to hunt, two to clear a path
through the woods, and the remainder to look after the animals and
perform the labour of the camp. By the 28th of October all was in
readiness; and the little party set off with Thomas, an Iroquois Indian,
to act as guide.

It was a full month before they had crossed the belt that lay between
them and the Athabaska. The road ran through a wretched country, over
mountains and across muskegs. Here and there the fires of the forest had
cut wide swathes through the woods, leaving in their wake a tangled mass
of fallen timber, through which they had to hack their way. In the bogs
the horses lost their footing, shifting their packs and bruising their
knees, until in a short while they were almost useless. To complete the
misery of the travellers, there was the difficulty of securing food.
Their dried provisions were soon exhausted. Game was scarce; and the
hunters often returned empty-handed after a long day's chase.

By the first of December they had reached the Athabaska. Four days later
they had come to a point on the river a little above Brulé lake, where
the guide informed Thompson that owing to the lateness of the season,
all thought of crossing the mountains with horses had to be given up.
The greater number of the beasts were therefore sent back to Rocky
Mountain House; four only were retained to ease the burden of the dogs.

The thermometer now registered 32° below zero; and the party threw
themselves into the work of building a rough shelter of logs to serve
while they prepared sleds and snow shoes with which to complete their
journey. At the end of the month they made a fresh start. Urged by the
shouts and lashings of the voyageurs, the dogs with their burdens
scurried along the ice of the river. In five days they came to the
grassy ponds that marked its headwaters--the last possible pasturage for
horses. Here, therefore, the poor animals were turned loose to survive
the winter as best they could.

Four days more brought the party to the height of land. The landscape,
as far as the eye could reach, was clothed with a heavy mantle of
gleaming snow. Round about towered the lofty peaks, their sides scarred
by avalanches which had swept the slopes bare of trees and rocks in
their descent. To the right lay an enormous glacier, a mass of
blue-green ice, the eastern face of which was not less than two thousand
feet in height. The night was fine, and the stars shone with such
brilliance that one of the men told Thompson that he felt he could
almost touch them with his hands.

Early next morning they began the descent to the valley of the Columbia.
On the eastern face of the mountains, the approach to the height of land
had been a long and steady climb. To the west, the ground fell away in a
series of abrupt slopes, so steep in places that it required sure
footing to avoid a tumble. A short advance therefore was enough to
produce an amazing difference in the climate. The snow which to the east
of the mountains was thin and dry, here lay heavy and wet upon the
ground; and they entered a forest of clean grown pine of gigantic height
and girth. So heavy were the loads and so steep the slope that the dogs
were unable to guide the sleds, and from time to time they came against
the base of a pine tree with considerable force, dog on one side, sled
on the other, so that they were disentangled with difficulty. To relieve
the animals, Thompson had a portion of the loads removed from the sleds.
The men grumbled as they were forced to lug these packs forward through
the heavy snow. Finally after fifteen days' travel they arrived at the
banks of the Columbia.

Mutterings of discontent were now openly heard among the French
Canadians. They had had enough, and would follow the madman no further.
Four of them suited the action to the word and deserted. Two of the
others Thompson despatched with letters to William Henry, describing the
route he had discovered, and ordering Henry to follow him along it with
an additional supply of goods. With the remainder, Thompson set forth on
the journey up the Columbia. They had gone but one day when they, too,
balked at the restless energy of their leader. Faced with incipient
mutiny, Thompson had no choice except to return to the mouth of the Wood
river, and there pass the rest of the winter.

The place of his enforced residence was the famous "Boat Encampment" of
later days. At this point, the Columbia, after having pursued a
north-westerly course for upwards of two hundred miles from its sources,
bent sharply around the head of the Selkirk Mountains, and flowed off to
the south. At the bend, the stream was joined by two tributaries, the
Wood and Canoe rivers, coming in from the north, and forming at their
mouths a wide meadow of rich alluvial soil. There in the midst of a
forest of giant pine and larch, the party cleared a site, and built
themselves a rough cabin. Thompson, never idle, spent his time exploring
the neighbourhood, and constructing a boat for the remainder of the
journey. As there was no birch bark available, he built it
clinker-fashion of cedar boards split thin; and these, in default of
nails, he sewed together with the fine roots of the pine.

The snow was not yet off the ground when he was once more on his way. He
had counted on reaching the mouth of the Columbia not later than the
first of August, and would gladly have made the descent by way of the
river itself, which here lay clear before him. Of his canoemen, however,
three only had the courage to risk the chances of the voyage. With so
few men it would have been madness to venture a long journey on unknown
waters and in the midst of possible enemies; so he determined to make
his way past his old trading posts to the Salish country. There he knew
he could find plenty of free hunters to help him in accomplishing the
voyage to the sea.

It was six weeks before he had reached Salish House, where he hoped to
find Finan McDonald. But neither McDonald nor Jaco Finlay was at the
post, and, as they had left no letter to indicate their whereabouts,
Thompson prepared to descend Clark's Fork by himself. The river
presented an appearance vastly different from that of the autumn of
1809, when he had passed down it before. The spring floods were now at
their height, and the water was rising at the rate of two feet each day,
inundating the meadows to the foot of the hills, and dashing along with
such violence that every island became a water-fall, with a strong eddy
at the lower end. Down this raging torrent they paddled, keeping in
midstream, and thankful as they passed each danger spot in safety. The
antelopes had retired to the hills, and they lived on the meat of horses
which they traded from the Indians.

On the 8th of June they arrived at the point where the river entered the
Box cañon and became utterly unnavigable. There Thompson found a small
camp of Kullyspell Indians, who informed him that Finan McDonald was now
at a post which he had built on the banks of the Spokane river further
south. Thompson engaged two of these Indians to inform McDonald of his
presence; while he himself waited until the latter should join him with
horses to carry his goods overland to the new post. Four days later
McDonald, with thirteen horses, arrived; and Thompson with all his
possessions was transported overland to Spokane House, about ten miles
northwest of the present city of Spokane.

The Spokane river, like Clark's Fork, was a tributary of the Columbia,
and, like it, unnavigable toward the mouth. Thompson therefore left a
small assortment of goods with McDonald, and proceeded northwest along a
well-beaten Indian trail to a point on the Columbia, just below
Ilthkoyape or Kettle Falls. Here the stream dropped several feet in two
magnificent cataracts, the roar of which could be heard for many miles
around.

Just below the falls was an Indian village, the first of its kind that
Thompson had seen. It was composed of a number of huts, each from thirty
to sixty feet in length, roughly built of large cedar logs which had
drifted down the river, and roofed with mats of woven fibre stout enough
to withstand the rain. The Indians who dwelt here subsisted mainly on
fish. Each spring, as the spawning season drew near, they propitiated
the manito of the salmon with elaborate dances and ceremonies. Thus
purified, they took their stand just beneath the falls and speared or
netted the fish, which they smoked in quantities sufficient to last them
through the year.

Thompson enquired of these people regarding the course of the river both
up and down. From them he learned that the village at Kettle Falls was
the highest along the stream that had survived the incursions of the
Piegans. Below them there was a journey of ninety miles of rapids, at
the end of which stood another village of salmon fishers. Beyond this
they could tell him nothing. Meanwhile the canoemen were busy preparing
a boat. In this region timber was very scarce. They had to journey seven
miles from the river before they found a clump of cedar from which they
could hew the planking of a canoe; and it was not until the third day of
July that the boat was finished.

With five French Canadians, two Iroquois Indians, and a couple of the
natives for interpreters, Thompson now embarked on the last stage of his
journey to the sea. He remembered how, following the settlement of the
international boundary west of Lake Superior, the traders of the North
West Company had been driven from a country which they had made their
own. By that settlement, the forty-ninth parallel had been accepted as
the line from the Lake of the Woods to the watershed of the Rocky
Mountains. West of the Rockies however, all was still debatable land;
and in that vast region, with its timbered mountains and rich valleys,
the wealth of fish in its rivers and of minerals hidden in its bosom, he
claimed the right of a discoverer. At the stern of his little craft, the
Union Jack floated proudly in the breeze; and at each halting place,
Thompson posted a written notice in the name of the North West Company
of merchants from Canada, formally taking possession of the country for
His Majesty, King George the Third.

Down the river sped the canoe, the paddlers with long swinging strokes
easily keeping abreast of the stream. Most of the rapids they were able
to shoot; and before nightfall they had completed the ninety miles to
the village of which they had heard above. Tents were pitched and
Thompson summoned the chiefs to smoke with him.

In a short while the chief arrived, followed by his men in single file.
All sat down in a circle about the tent, and the chief made a brief
speech, welcoming the strangers and offering them presents of dried
salmon and native herbs. Pipes were then lighted and solemnly passed
round. Following this the chief delivered a long harangue, in which he
expressed the hope that the white men would provide his people with
guns, ammunition, axes, knives, awls, not to mention steels and flints
and many other articles of which they stood sadly in need. They were, he
said, able and willing to hunt, and would pay for everything they got.
At present, however, they had only their hands with which to procure
food and clothing.

Thompson explained that his object was to explore the course of the
river to the sea. If it proved navigable, very large canoes would come
from over the ocean with goods of all kinds, and industrious hunters
would be supplied with everything they required.

The colloquy finished, permission was given for the women of the tribe
to approach. A dance of welcome followed, at the end of which the weary
travellers were left to their repose. In this way Thompson made friends
with the natives wherever he found them along the river.

As he advanced, Thompson passed out of the forest country, and entered
the arid plain that lies about the confluence of the Snake river with
the Columbia. Occasional willows and cottonwoods were to be seen,
growing in the neighbourhood of streams; but over the greater part of
this region, the only shrub capable of finding a lodging was the hardy
sage. The natives he now encountered were of the unhappy Snake family,
who had been driven for refuge to this barren country by the relentless
pressure of their foes. Some of them fled in terror at his approach.
Others, less timid, gazed with admiring eyes upon the guns, kettles,
axes, and other paraphernalia of his camp. Their eagerness to obtain
such wonders was in proportion to their need; for they did not appear to
possess even bows and arrows or the stone axes and knives that were
common among the Eskimos of the far north.

The river now turned to the west; and far ahead on his left Thompson
discerned the snow-capped cone of Mount Hood, which marked the line of
the Cascade Mountains near the coast. Fifty miles short of this, he came
to a village at which, as usual, he put ashore. Here the natives warned
him of the treacherous Dalles or rapids just ahead, where the river for
a distance of two miles glides noiselessly through a cañon never more
than two hundred yards wide, and the ledges of basalt, projecting into
the stream, create whirlpools and eddies in which the traveller is
sucked to his death. At the same time, the natives informed him that at
the mouth of the river, a party of white men who had come in a great
canoe from the ocean, were busy erecting a house. Thus he learned that
the Astorian party had anticipated him in reaching the mouth of the
Columbia.

A guide from the village carried him safely through the Dalles, was
paid, and returned to the village. Fifty miles further down stream,
Thompson approached "the Cascades," where the river cuts through the
deep lava beds of the Cascade mountains and makes a descent of about
three hundred feet. Here the cañon was no less than six miles long, and
nearly a mile in depth. Trying in vain to secure a guide, Thompson
entered the rapids alone. For three miles he "ran" the rapids; a portage
of one mile followed, taking him past the worst stretch of the river; he
then re-embarked, and emerged in safety to the quiet water below.

There was still one hundred and fifty miles to the mouth of the river;
but the magnificent forests of Douglas fir, cedar, and hemlock which now
clothed the country told them that they had come within the beneficient
influence of the sea. Two days' paddle brought them to Tongue point,
beyond which they had a full view of the ocean. To the left, not more
than a couple of miles distant, they beheld four low log huts,
constructed of timbers newly cut--in the words of Thompson, "the famous
Fort Astoria of John Jacob Astor and the United States".

At Fort Astoria, Thompson was welcomed by Duncan McDougall and David
Stuart, old colleagues in the service of the North West Company. As
their guest, he spent a week at the post taking observations for its
position and preparing for the return voyage. Toward the mouth of the
river, the natives had been demoralized by their association with
wandering traders from the sea; and remembering their surly behaviour
and menacing looks, Thompson saw to it that his men had their arms in
readiness. On the 22nd of July, he embarked. At the Cascades, he was
forced to appeal to the natives for assistance in climbing the rapids.
The scoundrels were importunate in their demands. With knives in their
hands and poisoned arrows in their bows, they were ready to kill and
plunder the travellers. But the courage and resolution of Thompson
warded off the crisis; and once above the Cascades he was again among
the poor but friendly savages of the interior. Thompson was anxious to
avoid the ninety miles of rapids below Kettle Falls. When he came to the
mouth of the Snake river, he turned up this stream and ascended it as
far as the present Lyon's Ferry. From thence, having borrowed horses of
the natives, he journeyed overland across the sterile, sandy plain as
far as Spokane House; and from Spokane House, with the assistance of
Jaco Finlay, he once more reached the Columbia above Kettle Falls.
There, building a fresh canoe, he re-embarked and made his way through
the Arrow lakes to the Boat Encampment, thus completing his survey of
the Columbia from its source to its mouth.

The following winter Thompson spent inspecting his various posts, and
distributing among them additional supplies of goods which he had
received from beyond the mountains. From Salish House, he rode east
along Clark's Fork to a hill top within the limits of the present city
of Missoula; and from thence he was able to trace the route of Lewis and
Clark through the Bitter Root Mountains to the banks of Snake river.

In the spring he was once more back at Kettle Falls, where the furs from
the winter's hunt were being collected. The results were excellent; six
canoes had to be made ready to accommodate the packs. By the 22nd of
April, his preparations were complete. The brigade set off by way of the
Columbia, Athabaska pass, and Churchill river route to Fort William.

In the summer of 1812, when Thompson arrived at Fort William after his
last journey from beyond the Rockies, he was in the forty-third year of
his life. It was twenty-eight years since he had landed as an apprentice
on the shores of Hudson Bay; and twenty-three years since he had
actively embarked on his career as a surveyor. During all this time he
had been constantly accumulating materials for his great map of the
North West. His work was now complete; so that instead of returning to
the interior, he joined the annual brigade of great canoes bound for
Montreal. Thus did David Thompson bid adieu forever to the Great North
West.

CHAPTER VIII

LAST YEARS

In 1812, hostilities had broken out between the British Empire and the
United States, and the flame of war was raging along the international
border. In the St. Mary's river, the voyageurs of the North West convoy
with which Thompson was travelling feared that American troops might
intercept their rich cargo of furs, but they passed through the narrows
without being molested and were soon safe among the islands of the north
shore of Lake Huron. From thence they made a speedy passage up the
French river and down the Ottawa to Montreal.

His country endangered, Thompson accepted a commission in a battalion of
infantry then being raised by his old colleague Roderick Mackenzie, but
it does not appear that he was ever on active service. The winter of
1813-4 he spent in preparing a final draft of his map. This map, in
which was embodied the record of his life work, became a proud
possession of the North West Company. For many years it occupied a place
of honour on the walls of the banqueting hall at Fort William.

When the war was over, Thompson was selected as British representative
on the commission which surveyed the international boundary from the
River St. Lawrence to the Lake of the Woods. This task occupied him for
the next ten years, and was concluded in the autumn of 1826.

At this time, Thompson planned to offer to the public an edition of his
map, and even went so far as to prepare a prospectus. This prospectus is
worth reproducing, because it sets forth in Thompson's own words the
achievements of his career as a geographer:

"PROSPECTUS"

\"To be published in England, by David Thompson, a new and correct map
of the Countries in North America; situated between the parallels of 45
degrees; and 60 degrees of North Latitude; and extending in longitude
from the east side of Lake Superior, and Hudson's Bay, quite across the
Continent to the Pacific Ocean; and from his own local knowledge; being
the result of 22 years employment in discovering, and laying down the
several rivers, lakes, hills and mountains on this extensive tract of
country; many parts of which had never before been explored; these
discoveries were only finished in 1812. The whole founded on
astronomical observations, the author being an astronomer by profession.

\"A small part of this work has already found its way to the public,
being copies of a rough map laid before the North West Company of
Canada.

\"Of these regions the map makers have no doubt given the best
delineation they could acquire; but of what was known, so little was
founded on astronomical observations; and their being obliged to fill up
the vacant space with what information they could procure, has led them
into many errors.

\"In this map now offered to the public, almost all the great rivers on
the above part of the continent, on both sides the great mountains are
traced to their sources; the sources of the Mississippi, and several
other great rivers, and the shores of Lake Superior, have been examined
and laid down by the author only.

\"The position, extent and height of the hills and mountains, have
engaged much of his attention; of which he has many landscapes. The last
six years of his discoveries were on the west side of the mountains to
the Pacific Ocean. Each Indian Nation's Territories, with their limits,
and the places of the trading settlements will be marked out.

\"The courses and distances, (taken when necessary to 100 yards,) with
their calculations, etc., the astronomical observations, and rough maps
on the scale of one inch to a mile, on which these maps are founded will
be open to the inspection of the curious, while the work is publishing;
and it will doubtless afford much speculation to the scientific, to find
many of the great rivers of North America taking their rise in a small
compass, and going off to the different seas like Radii from a centre.

\"To render the map more general, and to give connection to all the
parts, the author will avail himself of the Sea Coast of Hudson's Bay
and the Pacific Ocean, etc., etc., as laid down by the latest navigators
and travellers; whatever he has not personally examined himself, will be
in a different colour, and the authority mentioned.

\"Nothing less than an unremitting perseverance bordering on enthusiasm
could have enabled him to have brought these maps to their present
state; in early life he conceived the idea of this work, and Providence
has given him to complete, amidst various dangers, all that one man
could hope to perform.

\"The map will be engraved in a neat, chaste manner, combining elegance
and economy, on the scale of 3 inches to one degree of longitude and
will form either a map or an atlas at the will of the subscriber.

\"The arduous survey, on which the author is at present employed does
not permit him to present the Public with a description of these
Countries and the nations of aborigines. This he hopes to perform as
soon as time permits.

\"It is expected the geographical map will be ready for delivery to the
subscribers by the latter end of the summer of 1820 at the latest.

\"These parts of North America have long been a desideratum on
geography.

"He also offers to the scientific public, of the same size as the
general map, a chart to contain only the grand features of this part of
the Continent, such as the great mountains and hills, the principal
rivers and extensive lakes; as he proposes to delineate on this chart,
the position and extent of the coal mines; of the various beds of
different kinds of stone and rock; of the great meadows and forests; the
limits of the countries on which the Bison, Elk, Red Deer, Wild Sheep,
etc., etc., are found; the line of the old, and new portions of this
part of the continent; the line of the position of the Countries, over
which, is the most constant appearance and greatest brightness of the
Aurora Borealis; and the line that bounds their appearance to the
westward, beyond which they are not seen; and whatever else he may deem
worthy of remark; all of which could not have been delineated on the
geographical map without causing confusion."

The terms of this prospectus reveal in striking fashion the scientific
spirit in which Thompson's great work was conceived; but if he hoped
that the learned world would welcome and support his efforts, he was
doomed to disappointment. In the early years of the nineteenth century,
interest in the interior of North America was confined to very few
persons. It may have been that the number of subscribers was inadequate.
It may have been that no publisher would take the risk of issuing the
work. At any rate the map and chart which Thompson projected never saw
the light of day.

At the conclusion of his labours on the International Boundary
Commission, Thompson felt himself in a position to retire. Throughout
his working career, he had always enjoyed a good salary. With part of
his savings, he purchased a comfortable house at Williamstown in the
county of Glengarry, where he settled down with his wife and growing
family. It was there, on the 4th of March 1829, that the last of his
thirteen children was born. With characteristic public spirit, he
entered into the life of the community. When the Presbyterians of
Williamstown desired to build a church, he lent them money with which to
do so. As his sons grew to manhood, a considerable amount of his savings
was required to set them up in business.

Thompson's declining years were clouded by financial worries, which were
largely the result of his generous and honourable disposition. The
congregation whom he had assisted were unable to pay off their mortgage,
so he deeded to them the church and grounds. His sons failed in
business, and in discharging their debts, he seriously crippled himself.
He sold his home at Williamstown, and removed to Longueuil, near
Montreal, where there were greater opportunities of securing employment.
Resuming his old occupation, he surveyed the canoe route from Lake Huron
to the upper Ottawa. This was in 1837, and some years later he surveyed
the shores of Lake St. Peter.

During these years, Thompson worked on the narrative account of his
explorations which he had undertaken to give the world at the time when
he planned to publish his map. He was anxious also to earn what money he
could from the publication of his book. It is said that Washington
Irving, the great American writer, and the author of *Astoria*, wished
to buy the manuscript. Irving, however, was unwilling to promise that in
using it he would give to Thompson the recognition which he felt was his
due; and, jealous to the last of his reputation, the old man refused to
part with his work. The manuscript therefore, like the map, lay
forgotten, until it was discovered in recent years, and published in
1915 by the Champlain Society.

The American Revolutionary War had left a legacy of boundary disputes
which were destined to disturb peaceful relations between Great Britain
and the United States for years to come. Owing to his work both for the
North West Company and on the International Boundary Commission,
Thompson was better acquainted than most men with the issues involved in
these disputes; and he was convinced that on account of the stupidity
and carelessness of British diplomats, the just claims of British
America had been continuously ignored or overridden from the time when
the original treaty of peace had been drawn in 1783. In his narrative,
Thompson relates an interesting story regarding the settlement made in
that year. The story is worth repeating, not only because it illustrates
his attitude toward the boundary question, but also because of the light
it sheds on conditions in the North West at the time, and the greatness
of the service which Thompson and others performed in mapping the
country.

Among the traders, he says, who made their way from Montreal into the
fur countries was a certain Peter Pond, a native of Boston. Pond was a
man of violent and unprincipled character. In the winter of 1780-1, he
was stationed at Lake La Ronge with orders to act in concert with Wadin,
a fellow trader of the North West Company. One evening, while dining
with Wadin, he made himself drunk; and in an outburst of passion shot
Wadin through the thigh. His unhappy victim expired from loss of blood.

Pond, however, was an energetic trader; and since in those wild times
and remote places the arm of the law was weak, he escaped the punishment
which he richly deserved. A few years later he had penetrated to Lake
Athabaska, the first white man to do so. There he disputed the fur trade
with a certain John Ross, who followed him into the country in the
interests of a rival firm. An altercation took place between the two
traders, and Pond shot Ross dead.

On this occasion Pond was arrested and brought to Canada for trial. But
the authorities at Quebec did not consider that their jurisdiction
extended to the territories of the Hudson's Bay Company, and the
prisoner was set at liberty. He thereupon returned to Boston, his native
city.

The peace negotiations were at that time in progress. The commissioners
for great Britain were two honest, well-meaning gentlemen, who however
knew nothing of the geography of the countries with which they had to
deal. The maps at their disposal were wretchedly inadequate. One of
them, Farren's, dated 1773, showed the country as far west as the middle
of Lake Ontario. Beyond that point the interior was represented as made
up of rocks and swamps, and described as uninhabitable. Such maps gave
every advantage to one who was personally acquainted with the west, and
the United States commissioners had at their service the expert advice
of Peter Pond.

Had the British possessed the slightest idea of the value of the
territories in question, and had they been disposed in the slightest
degree to press their claims, they might have insisted on a line drawn
due west from the middle of Lake Champlain. Such a division the
Americans would have been glad to accept, for it gave them more than
they could justly demand. But Pond was at the elbow of the United States
commissioners. He suggested to them a line passing through the Great
Lakes to the north west corner of the Lake of the Woods, and from thence
westward (as he imagined from his own rough surveys) to the head of the
Mississippi river. This demand, exorbitant though it was, the British
commissioners accepted, and it was confirmed by both nations. Such was
the hand (concludes Thompson grimly) that designated the boundary
between the dominions of Great Britain and the territories of the United
States.

The settlement of 1783 was in Thompson's eyes merely the first of a
series of unfortunate arrangements, by which the British dominions were
robbed of extensive and valuable territory. Edmund Burke had remarked
that a malignant fate seemed to attend all the operations of Great
Britain on the continent of North America. Thompson, who from his
personal experience knew the land and the people who disputed its
possession, was able to explain in a less mysterious way the failure of
the British to defend their claims against American pretensions.

Accordingly, in the summer of 1840, Thompson addressed a number of
letters to Sir Robert Peel, Lord Stanley and the Hon. W. E. Gladstone on
the subject of disputed points along the border. His object was to urge
a prompt and just settlement in each case. Such a settlement, he felt,
was important if peace was to be maintained with "so litigious a
neighbour." It was vital, if the steady encroachments of that neighbour
were to be brought to an end, and Britain was not to be gradually
deprived of her hold upon her last possessions in America.

Thompson therefore endeavoured to arouse the leading statesmen of the
Mother Country to the significance of American policy as he saw it. The
leading men of the United States, he pointed out, all held it as a maxim
that no foreign power had any right to any part of North America; and
that every means ought to be employed to expel this foreign power. They
were well aware of the insecurity of their position. On their northern
frontier a powerful foreign nation was in possession for upwards of one
thousand miles. Their sea coast was open and exposed. The numerous
slaves in their southern and western states were ready for revolt; while
to the west were seventy thousand Indian warriors, who had been
compelled by force or fraud to quit their lands, and who could readily
be aroused to a war of revenge.

Accordingly, he alleged, the Americans had aimed ever since the treaty
of 1783 to restrict as far as possible the territory of Great Britain
and to destroy her influence over the Indians. Their method was to
advance claims which, though exorbitant, would be softened and rendered
familiar by the operation of time, and in each case, when the
settlements came to be made, they aimed to be in possession of the areas
in dispute. British subjects on the other hand had been compelled to
yield ground from point to point, because they could not rely on the
support of the Imperial government if they stood firm.

As he wrote, the situation was acute along the whole length of the
frontier. On the Quebec border, all the way from St. Regis on the
St. Lawrence to the Connecticut river, the Americans were holding fast
to a line some distance north of the true parallel of 45° which had been
named as the frontier in the original treaty of peace and confirmed some
years later by the award of the King of the Netherlands. In the
St. Mary's river, American commissioners were claiming two of the three
boat channels and all but two or three hundred yards of a river bed four
miles wide. If their demands at that point were granted, Great Britain
would surrender the keys to her northern and western dominions, and shut
herself off from communication with them except by the frozen shores of
the Hudson Bay. At the head of Lake Superior, the Americans had driven
the British traders from two of the three possible routes joining the
Great Lakes with the Lake of the Woods, and were claiming that the
treaty of 1783 implied a boundary running along the line of the third
and last possible route (the Kaministiquia river), although the very
existence of that route was utterly unknown until at least seventeen
years after the treaty was drawn. In the present congress they were
again urging the necessity of taking possession of what they called the
"Oregon Territory," and demanding a line down the middle of the Columbia
river to the Pacific ocean.

Thus did the old man endeavour to arm British statesmanship for the
diplomatic contests which he foresaw were inevitable; but his efforts
bore little or no fruit. On the part of Great Britain, conciliatory
motives continued to prevail; and within a few years, Thompson had the
mortification of seeing even the Oregon territory (that is, all the fine
country south of 49° north latitude which he himself had discovered)
lost to the Empire. It is not surprising that he fumed at British
diplomats in general, and in particular at "the stupidity of that
blockhead Lord Ashburton."

There is little more to record in the life of David Thompson. Presently,
his eyesight failed, and he suffered the misery of a destitute old age.
One by one his possessions fell into the hands of money-lenders. So poor
did he become that he was forced to part with his precious instruments,
and even to pawn his coat in order to buy a little food. A late entry of
his diary reads, "This day borrowed 2/6 from a friend. Thank God for
this relief." On the 10th of February, 1857, the long ordeal was ended
and Thompson passed away in the eighty-seventh year of his age. He was
buried in Mount Royal cemetery without even a stone to mark his grave.

For a long while after the death of Thompson, it seemed as though the
memory of his achievements had perished with him. But of recent years
his fame, so nearly eclipsed, has shone with renewed brilliance, and it
is now possible to estimate in some degree the greatness of his
character and the magnitude of his work.

In the sheer length of his journeys, few western explorers have equalled
the record of Thompson, for he travelled in all not less than fifty
thousand miles. Much of this was through country untrodden by the feet
of white men; nearly all of it was in regions as yet unsurveyed. The
unvarying exactitude with which Thompson mapped this vast area excited
the surprise and admiration of members of the Canadian Geological Survey
who with infinitely better equipment traced his progresses nearly a
century later. There are certain districts which since his day have
never been re-surveyed; some of his work therefore still appears on the
published maps of Canada.

Throughout his life Thompson was inspired by a restless impulse to push
forward the exploration and mapping of the west until not a corner of it
remained unknown. The greatest satisfaction of his career was
undoubtedly the discovering of the Columbia valley. West of the Rockies,
he was not merely a surveyor and explorer, but in a real sense an Empire
builder, for he added a region of vast and varied resources to the
territories of the Crown.

It is difficult for Europeans to associate with savages without
misunderstandings more or less serious. The savage governs his life by
an elaborate ritual which he has inherited from his ancestors. His code
is sufficient to cover his dealings with his fellows; but it fails to
guide him in his relations with the strange new beings who burst in upon
him from what is in truth a different world. The white man, unless he is
gifted with unusual tact and sympathy, treats with contempt and scorn
the customs of the natives and seldom attempts to understand their ways.
Worse still, he feels himself freed from the restraints which bind him
in civilized life, and frequently gives rein to the basest passions of
his nature. Thus mutual misunderstanding too often breeds hatred, and
results in the shedding of blood.

To a surprising degree, the traders of the Hudson's Bay and North West
Companies were able to overcome the difficulties and dangers of dealing
with the Indians, and their relations with them were correspondingly
successful. Yet even successful traders often lacked the imaginative
sympathy which would have enabled them to submit with patience to the
complicated ritual of Indian life; and standing aloof as they did from
the Indians, they were involved in constant broils and, not
infrequently, in danger at their hands.

Moreover, in the fierceness of their competition, the traders were too
often willing to play sharp tricks on one another, and these practices
taught the Indians evil ways. To drug the natives with liquor and steal
furs destined for rival firms was a habit only too common. It sometimes
happened also that small independent traders had their supplies taken
from them, their canoes destroyed and themselves beaten senseless, so
that they were driven from the fur countries, ruined men. Individuals
like Peter Pond were guilty of offences more serious still. Their hands
were stained with the blood of their competitors, and in the rough and
tumble of life in the wilds, their crimes were hard to detect and harder
still to punish. The Indians had learned that the Great Spirit hates to
see the ground reddened with blood. But when they saw thuggery and
murder flourish, how could they preserve their simple faith?

Throughout his career in the west, Thompson was one of those whose
influence among the Indians was almost wholly for good, and whose
activities shed lustre on the history of the Hudson's Bay Company and
the North West Company, whom they served. His travels carried him into
the rocky belt south-west of the Bay, over the prairies, through the
western forest, and across the mountains of the Pacific slope. Wherever
he came in contact with the natives, he easily won their admiration and
respect. This was due to the insight with which he studied their customs
and to the sympathy with which he regarded their way of life. For
Thompson was infinitely more than a trader: he had the mind of a
scientist and the soul of a poet.

Love of country springs from many roots; but perhaps the deepest
patriotism is that which comes from an intimate knowledge of the face of
the land itself. Thompson loved the great North West with the love of a
man who knew it in all its moods; for he had journeyed through it and
studied it carefully over a long period of years. He foresaw the day
when the rolling prairies would be covered with smiling farms, and the
Columbia valley would be the seat of a rich and vigorous civilization.
In one respect, his vision of the future fell short of reality. Living
in an age prior to the development of railways, he failed to see that
these regions were destined to be linked by steel bands with the Canadas
in a Dominion stretching from sea to sea. He thought of them rather as
isolated communities, the middle west looking mainly for its outlet to
Hudson Bay, the Pacific coast joined to civilization by the paths of
ocean.

Characters such as David Thompson are all too rare in the annals of a
nation. So long as honour is due to great men, his memory deserves to be
enshrined in the hearts of his countrymen; and his high qualities should
be a model to those who inherit the Dominion which he did so much to
make.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

The most important source of information regarding the life and work of
David Thompson is to be found in the *Publications of the Champlain
Society*, Vol. XII. (Toronto, 1915). This volume contains the Narrative
of Thompson's explorations, edited by Mr. J. B. Tyrrell with a full
general introduction, an itinerary or catalogue of Thompson's journeys
year by year, and notes on the text. The manuscript journals of
Alexander Henry and David Thompson have been published, under the title
of *New Light on the Early History of the Great North West*, by Elliott
Coues (2 vols., New York, 1897). In this work, Henry's journal has been
published as a continuous narrative, and extracts have been made from
Thompson's journal to throw additional light on specific points.
Thompson's original note books are in the Crown Lands Department,
Parliament Buildings, Toronto. They are too bulky, and too much
encumbered with mathematical data, to be of interest to the general
reader, and so have never been published as they stand. An article by
Mr. L. J. Burpee in the *Canadian Historical Review*, vol. IV., 1923,
p. 105 ff., contains the prospectus of Thompson's map, and the series of
five letters which he addressed to English statesmen on the subject of
boundary disputes in 1840.

Washington Irving's *Astoria* presents a graphic picture of the
occupation of the mouth of the Columbia by the agents of John Jacob
Astor. The narrative contains an interesting account of the appearance
of David Thompson at the newly erected fort, and of the impression which
his arrival made upon the Astorians.

There are short chapters on Thompson in G. Bryce, *History of the
Hudson's Bay Company*, Agnes Laut, *Conquest of the Great North West*,
and W. S. Wallace, *By Star and Compass*.

\*\*\* END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVID THOMPSON--THE EXPLORER
\*\*\*

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so
the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this
license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and
trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be
used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the
trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project
Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use
this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be
modified and printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING in
the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially
commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU
DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used
on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree
to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that
you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without
complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C
below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and
you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent
you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with
others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United
States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a
notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright
holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United
States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or
providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with
the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission
for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set
forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access
to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that:

-   You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
    you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
    to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
    agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
    within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
    legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
    payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
    Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation."

-   You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
    License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
    copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
    all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
    works.

-   You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

-   You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your
equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect
in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written
explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received
the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your
written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the
defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S.
federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date
contact information can be found at the Foundation's website and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of
equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations (\$1 to
\$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status
with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility:
www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
